The objective of this research was to develop robust predictive models of the gains in working memory (WM) and fluid intelligence (Gf) following executive attention training in children, using genetic markers, gender, and age variables. We explore the influence of genetic variables on individual differences in susceptibility to intervention. Sixty-six children (males: 54.2%) aged 50.9-75.9 months participated in a four-weeks computerized training program. Information on genes involved in the regulation of dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine, and acetylcholine was collected. The standardized pre- to post-training gains of two dependent measures were considered: WM Span backwards condition (WISC-III) and the IQ-f factor from the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test (K-BIT). A machine-learning methodology was implemented utilizing multilayer perceptron artificial neural networks (ANN) with a backpropagation algorithm. Both ANN models reached high overall accuracy in their predictive classification. Variations in genes involved in dopamine and norepinephrine neurotransmission affect children's susceptibility to benefit from executive attention training, a pattern that is consistent with previous studies.
The reflexive effort proposed here is oriented to is aimed at investigating two concepts that make up the core of our constitution as rational beings, that is, as people, we refer to thought and language. What is sought, above all, is to contemplate this link under a somewhat different perspective from those that are usually presented in the literature that circulates through the main bibliographic circuits, those that usually come from psychology, linguistics and, increasingly, from neurosciences. A look is proposed here that emphasizes the link of these concepts with different regions of the conceptual space that we inhabit, which opens reflexive instances that are revealed in their maximum expression when we give ourselves to review or question certain assumed or inherited understandings about said concepts. This journey goes through strong statements, sometimes intentionally careless and free of nuances, which above all seek provocation, open debates, reactions and new productions, before taking care of the style and coverage of all the flanks. It does not resist humor or everyday text, it exposes himself, in short, it tries to open rather than close the conversation. People are complex beings, beings of institutions, of language, we are not bodies nor are we inside them; our limits are not cut in space but, without a doubt, they go beyond our body.
Objective The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of an online module in promoting study strategies based on neuroscience applied to education for first-year dental students at the University of the Andes in Santiago, Chile. Methods Four weeks after the start of the 2018 first academic semester, all 82 first-year dental students (72% females, 28% males, average 19.0 years old) were invited to voluntarily and anonymously complete the self-reported Study Strategies Questionnaire (SSQ) in a session of an Introduction to Dentistry course, which served as a baseline. Subsequently, the session included an interactive workshop on learning how to learn so that students could analyse how the human brain learns and relate this information to mental tools to foster learning. Furthermore, during the semester, students were sent information via email to reinforce the content they were exposed to during the learning how to learn activity so that they could use the toolbox of study techniques to improve their learning in all subjects. At the end of the semester, students were invited to voluntarily and anonymously complete a second SSQ to assess the effects of the study intervention. Exam marks from the previous (2017) and studied year (2018), as well as both SSQ results, were compared and analysed using IBM Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS). Results A total of 75 and 71 students answered the SSQ before and after the intervention, respectively. The mean exam mark from 2017 was 63.7% (SD = 8.8), whilst in 2018, it was 69.6% (SD = 5.0) (p < .044); the effect size of the intervention was 0.75. The most significant changes observed after the intervention were reductions in the number of students who studied whilst checking messages on their smartphones (p = .001), studied by highlighting and/or underlining in their notes or textbooks (p <= .0001) and studied the day before an examination (p >= .0001). On the contrary, there were significant increases in the number of students who studied without access to social networks (p = .046), wrote notes or words in the margins of texts (p = .001), practised self-testing (p = .001) and studied the day before an examination (p <= .0001). Conclusions An online module to promote evidence-based study strategies in first-year dental students can have an impact on increasing students' marks as well as on some practices that can improve their academic achievements and learning.
The present work is the direct result of the improvement actions carried out from the project Evaluation of neurodevelopment in Cuban children from 6 to 18 years old through the BENCI Child Computerized Neuropsychological Evaluation Battery of the Faculty of Education of the university from Cienfuegos. To develop these actions, the diploma was selected as a postgraduate figure, so the objective of this work is: To describe the experience of the diploma: Neurosciences and education in the Cuban educational context, which will contribute to raising the quality of the teaching-learning process. The implementation of the program benefited more than 20 professionals, including pedagogues, psychologists, speech therapists, educational psychologists and doctors. The criteria issued by those enrolled, once the diploma course is completed, demonstrate the relevance of it for its application in their professional practice, they also refer to the satisfaction with the timeliness and quality of the contents received, as well as with the preparation of the teachers.
In cognitive neurosciences, fundamental principles of mental processes and functional brain organization have been established with highly controlled tasks and testing environments. Recent technical advances allowed the investigation of these functions and their brain mechanisms in naturalistic settings. The diversity in those approaches have been recently (Matusz, P. J., Dikker, S., Huth, A. G., & Perrodin, C. (2019). Are we ready for real-world neuroscience? Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 31(3), 327-338. doi:10.1162/jocn_e_01276) classified via a three-category cycle, including controlled laboratory, partially naturalistic laboratory, and naturalistic real-world research. Based on this model, we developed the Multidimensional Assessment of Research in Context (MARC) tool to easily delineate the approach researchers have taken in their study. MARC provides means to describe the degree of ecological validity for each component of a study (e.g., sample, stimuli, measures, etc.), and the study's location on the cycle. The tool comprises seven questions concerning a study's characteristics. It outputs a summary of those and a compass plot, which can be used for presentations, preregistration, grant proposals, and papers. It aims to improve drawing conclusions across studies and raise awareness about the generalizability of research findings.
Background The world has suffered immeasurably during the COVID-19 pandemic. Increased distress and mental and medical health concerns are collateral consequences to the disease itself. The Genes to Mental Health (G2MH) Network consortium sought to understand how individuals affected by the rare copy number variations of 22q11.2 deletion and duplication syndrome, associated with neurodevelopmental/neuropsychiatric conditions, were coping. The article focuses on worry and disruptions in medical care caused by the pandemic. Methods The University of Pennsylvania COVID-19 Stressor List and care disruption questions were circulated by 22 advocacy groups in English and 11 other languages. Results A total of 512 people from 23 countries completed the survey; most were caregivers of affected individuals. Worry about family members acquiring COVID-19 had the highest average endorsed worry, whilst currently having COVID-19 had the lowest rated worry. Total COVID-19 worries were higher in individuals completing the survey towards the end of the study (later pandemic wave); 36% (n = 186) of the sample reported a significant effect on health due to care interruption during the pandemic; 44% of individuals (n = 111) receiving care for their genetic syndrome in a hospital setting reported delaying appointments due to COVID-19 fears; 12% (n = 59) of the sample reported disruptions to treatments; and of those reporting no current disruptions, 59% (n = 269) worried about future disruptions if the pandemic continued. Higher levels of care disruptions were related to higher COVID-19 worries (Ps < 0.005). Minimal differences by respondent type or copy number variation type emerged. Conclusions Widespread medical care disruptions and pandemic-related worries were reported by individuals with 22q11.2 syndrome and their family members. Reported worries were broadly consistent with research results from prior reports in the general population. The long-term effects of COVID-19 worries, interruptions to care and hospital avoidance require further study.
Working memory (WM) is an essential cognitive process for the acquisition of learning in reading, writing and arithmetic, allowing for the proper processing of environmental stimuli; people with dyslexia (DLX) have alterations in this neurocognitive process, mainly in handling verbal information. The objective of this study is to analyse the link between MT, verbal memory, visual/ verbal memory, consciousness level, mind control and semantic memory in a sample of 130 schoolchildren diagnosed with DLX. In order to identify the link between the aforementioned variables, a structural equation model (SEM) was constructed in RCran 4.0.4 software, using the results obtained in the psychometric tests applied; WISC-IV, Visual/Verbal Memory, Verbal Memory and Wechsler Memory Curve. This paper concludes that people with DLX have deficiencies in several memory domains, the neuropsychological stimulation of this process is fundamental to guarantee the scholastic progress of the population with this neurodevelopmental disorder.
Inserting communication skills in different subjects of the curriculum is the objective of this study, aimed at children with difficulty at the attention level, consequently due to the genetic approach maintained by parents and families from the populated center from which they come. A multiple case study was designed that observed the problem from neuropsychological tests, genogram analysis and structured interviews with teachers, to create ways to insert communication skills into their subjects in an assertive way, with the use of educational psychology pedagogical tools, which allow them to improve their academic performance, which presents obvious weaknesses that cause them to repeat and finally drop out of school, so it can be concluded that any subject is susceptible to adaptation in its contents, if it is treated appropriately, with the use of the communication skills, making it more affordable and allowing to improve the academic and disciplinary performance of these children.
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is considered a neurodevelopmental disorder, whose prevalence has increased in recent years, showing in some cases deficits in the cognitive area, with processing speed (PS) being one of the affected variables. Therefore, the present study aims to: 1) compare the scores obtained in relation to the PS variable between students aged 6 to 11 with ASD and their peers with neurotypical development in Metropolitan Lima; and 2) establish the PS profile of the included students with ASD. For this, 30 children aged 6 to 11 attending to regular basic education institutions (RBE) in Metropolitan Lima were sampled, 15 with neurotypical development and 15 included with ASD. For the first objective, a case-control design (CCD) was used, while the second objective was a selective non-probabilistic cross-sectional design. Results showed a lower performance by the group with ASD in the PS tasks evaluated, compared to their neurotypical peers, as well as differences were found among the children in the group with ASD, which could be associated with the variety of skills that the tasks involved chores.
This article is based on the assumption that the presence of educational needs in classrooms is invisible because it is not included an accurate diagnosis. Two phases are designed. In the first phase, the practices of assistance to unspecified learning difficulties are analyzed by means of a descriptive design. The instruments applied are interviews, documents analysis and observation, interpreting the information within the framework of grounded theory. Secondly, from an activity of research process, a pedagogical intervention model is designed and validated. Other strategies are proposed, like respect for evolutionary processes and developmental rhythms, necessary multisensory adjustments applying the Universal Design for Learning (CAST, 2011), neuroeducation contributions, time management and environmental enrichment. Additionally, as regards teachers' training, it is found that most of them have theoretical knowledge but lack practical application skills.
This work deals with the estimation of a leak for a main pipe system without branches. An algorithm and a neu-ral network with 4 input variables are proposed, a hid-den layer with 25 neurons and 3 output variables. The data was obtained through a nested loop in Visual Basic (Excel (R)) establishing 35,837 leak scenarios for a 30 m pipe that conducts water with a kinematic viscosity of 0.000001 (m(2)/s), a diameter equal to 0.15222 m, rou-ghness of 0.0000015 m, pressure drop of 3.5 m and two accessories (k(1), k(2)) that add up to 1.5. Two flowmeters and two virtual pressure gauges were installed in the hy-draulic system at the beginning and end of the pipeline. Also, Epanet (R) and Hydroflo (R) (Tahoe Design Software) are used to structure the hydraulic model and validate the initial data. Matlab R2021a was used to analyze the Backpropagation and Bayesian Regularization learning algorithms adopting the log sigmoid transfer function. The mean square error and the coefficient of determi-nation R-2 were implemented as a control function. The neural model obtained presented a mean square error of 1.44E-06 and a relative error equal to 0.0055% for the training data. The cross-validation of the neural network was carried out from 5,973 independent input data.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to explore the tolerance for uncertainty in its different aspects (risk, ambiguity and complexity) in medical students at different times of their careers, and to relate these tolerance levels with their predominant personality traits and specialty choices. A secondary objective was to build a hypothetical model aimed at explaining the potential relationships of dependency between gender, personality traits, tolerance for uncertainty and specialty choice using a structural equation modeling (SEM) analysis. DESIGN/SETTING/PARTICIPANTS: A prospective cross-sectional study including two cohorts of second-year (n = 155) and sixth-year (n = 157) medical students was performed during 2017 at the Buenos Aires University School of Medicine. Both student cohorts completed instruments assessing tolerance for different types of uncertainty: (1) complexity (Tolerance for Ambiguity scale); (2) risk (Pearson Risk Attitude scale); and (3) ambiguity (Ambiguity Aversion in Medicine scale). Information on age, gender and specialty choice in sixth-year medical students was included, plus the Big Five Inventory-10 (BFI-10) personality test. RESULTS: Sixth-year students showed significantly lower scores than second-year students at tolerance for complexity (p = 0.0003) and ambiguity (p = 0.008). Sixth-year students choosing a surgical specialty were associated with low tolerance for risk and ambiguity, and moderate for complexity. Conversely, students choosing a clinical specialty were related with high tolerance for risk, moderate for ambiguity, and low for complexity. Logistic regression analysis including the uncertainty questionnaires plus BFI-10 categories demonstrated that only the neuroticism personality trait was independently associated with a surgical specialty choice (OR: 1.31, 95%CI: 1.03-1.67). The final SEM that best represented the data showed good fit statistics: chi-square (p = 0.108), and RMSEA (p = 0.047). CONCLUSIONS: Tolerance for uncertainty in its different dimensions was associated with personality traits and specialty choice among medical students. A SEM analysis could satisfactorily explain the hypothetical relationships of dependency between gender, personality traits, tolerance for uncertainty, and specialty choice. (C) 2021 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of Association of Program Directors in Surgery.
This article presents the design and implementation of the study program of the subject Stimulation of child neurodevelopment corresponding to the curriculum. The design and implementation of this subject program required the application of theoretical and empirical methods, such as; the review of documents, the observation, and the PNI technique (Positive, Negative and Interesting), for the evaluation of the program by the students themselves. The program is aimed at students in the major of Special Education and Speech Therapy Education, in study plans D and E. The design of the program consists of a foundation of the subject, content, objectives, skills, values, themes and content by topics, methodological guidelines, as well as the assessment of the subject. The implementation of the program benefited more than 70 students from all modalities of the aforementioned careers. The criteria issued by the students, once the subject is completed, demonstrate its relevance for its application in practice as future professionals, they also refer that it is attractive and interesting, novel and timely.
The use of higher-order thinking talk (HOTT), where speakers identify relations between representations (e.g., comparison, causality, abstraction) is examined in the spontaneous language produced by 64 typically developing (TD) and 46 brain-injured children, observed from 14-58 months at home. HOTT is less frequent in lower-income children and children with brain injuries, but effects differed depending on HOTT complexity and type of brain injury. Controlling for income, children with larger and later-occurring cerebrovascular infarcts produce fewer surface (where relations are more perceptual) and structure (where relations are more abstract) HOTT utterances than TD children. In contrast, children with smaller and earlier occurring periventricular lesions produce HOTT at comparable rates to TD children. This suggests that examining HOTT development may be an important tool for understanding the impacts of brain injury in children. Theoretically, these data reveal that both neurological (size and timing of brain injury) and environmental (family income) factors contribute to these skills.
This study analyzes the different factors that influence depression in college students. For this objective, a systematic review was carried out in important databases, selecting 17 scientific articles out of 127 published between 2019 and 2020. The main factors are situational, which includes heavy work and low academic performance; sociodemographic factors such as age, sex, origin, year of studies, type of work activity, family group; the quality of sleep; terrible physical condition; and, poor diet. On the other hand, there are also psychotic or neurotic factors such as dysfunctionality or problems of family cohesion; psychological problems; negative mental state and sense of life; problems of spirituality in the personality; as well as problems in love relationships. In this sense, it is necessary for schools to take strategies to observe and prevent students from presenting depressive situations; developing workshops, programs, counseling, periodic evaluations and orientations in order to solve these problems; since it is going to affect an adequate academic performance and difficulties in their personal development.
Introduction. The Executive Functions (EF) are a set of supramodal functions that favor cognitive, emotional and social skills. In early childhood, EFs influence the performance of academic skills. The present research determined the relationship between executive functions and academic performance in an educational context. Method. A correlational study was conducted involving 195 students between 6 and 12 years of age, randomly selected from primary grades (from 1 to 5). The executive functions measured were: verbal fluency (phonological and semantic), selective attention, cognitive flexibility, planning and inhibition; for which, the Neuropsychological Evaluation of the executive functions in children (ENFEN) was used and the academic performance was evaluated from the cumulative academic average in the year. Results. According to Spearman's correlation analysis, the results show that there is a statistically significant relationship between academic performance and the components of executive functions: phonological fluency (p = .01) and cognitive flexibility (p = .01). On the other hand, the logistic regression showed that semantic fluency and inhibition are predictive factors for academic performance in 76.4%. Discussion or Conclusion. Which suggests that executive functions are associated and in turn predict academic performance in elementary school students, especially if this is low.
Music-based interventions and music lessons modulate cognitive functions, such as language or attention. However, the specific and differential effects of musical activities are a new focus of research. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the effect of musical improvisation, a focal musical intervention, on the emotional memory of 4- and 5-year-old children. Each child individually looked at 24 neutral and emotional pictures and rated their valence and arousal. After that, the children were exposed to one of three interventions: musical improvisation (experimental intervention), musical reproduction (active control intervention), or rest (passive control intervention). Then, recall and recognition (immediate and deferred) were used to evaluate memory performance. The main results indicated that musical improvisation, compared with a reproduction music activity, improved memory. In addition, rest improved recognition compared with reproduction. Besides, children recalled more emotional than neutral images. Musical improvisation is a promising technique to be implemented in the educational field.
Recent studies are increasingly using brain-imaging techniques in the technology-enhanced learning (TEL) context to understand students' cognitive processes during technology-assisted learning, with the ultimate goal to improve students' outcomes in these environments. Given the importance of the promising impact of brain-imaging techniques in the technology-enhanced learning context, it is of utmost importance to analyze and investigate studies published in the intersection of these research areas. However, despite the growing interest in this promising research field, there is a lack of systematic literature review investigating how brain-imaging techniques have been applied in technology-enhanced learning environments. Therefore, this article presents a systematic literature review (SLR) using a well-accepted guideline to perform a rigorous study of the current literature to investigate, analyze, and understand how brain-imaging techniques have been applied in technology-enhanced learning contexts. This SLR considered studies published in nine academic databases that resulted in a total of 3910 studies that, after the selection process, were reduced to 37 studies (published during 2001-2019) for the final analysis. The studies' content analysis was used to classify the studies according to their objectives, brain-imaging techniques and devices used, educational levels, study domains, and studies outcomes. The main results indicate that i) most studies aim to use brain-imaging methods to measure/detect students' psychological processes while using educational technology to provide a personalized experience, ii) the most used brain-imaging technique in the studies is electroencephalogram, and iii) the most investigated study domain was Mathematics and Biology. Moreover, this article highlights some gaps found in the state-of-the-art and provides insights that can be used for future research.
The training of professionals, endowed with qualities and competences that weigh the respect for diversity and the socio-educational inclusion of children, adolescents and youngsters with special educational needs, connotes the necessary scientific updating of the university curriculum, through the transference and logical-didactic systematization of the neuroscientific knowledge. Contradictorily, the curricular study carried out in the Bachelor degree course on Special Education, from its foundation and until the current validation of the Study Plan E, made it possible to identify weaknesses, potentialities, as well as possibilities for improvement. With the help of the triangulation of empirical and theoretical methods, this work establishes recommendations for the improvement of the integration of neuroscientific knowledge, related to educational inclusion in curriculum subjects, in postgraduate programs, in undergraduate and postgraduate research lines, and in the didactic management of university professors.
The aim of the study was to characterize the cognitive skills of a group of school children who have been victims of physical abuse and to compare their performance with a group of non-abused children of the same age. Through a transversal design, we worked with a non-probabilistic sample for convenience of 40 children between 6 and 10 years old, enrolled in a public school in the city of Santa Marta, Colombia. Of these children, 20 have been identified as victims of physical abuse and 20 as non-abused. The results show that there are no significant differences between the two groups, however, children without maltreatment perform slightly better in most of the cognitive skills compared to the children with maltreatment. The implications of these results are discussed in terms of psychological intervention in school contexts, which is oriented towards the prevention of this phenomenon as one of the actions required to make effective a true education for peace in our country, from the promotion of a no-violence culture, especially towards children.
This study is a randomized controlled trial of a 12-week community-based group parenting intervention (CASITA) in Lima, Peru. CASITA improved neurodevelopment in a pilot study of 60 Peruvian children and subsequently scaled to 3,000 households throughout the district. The objective of this study was to assess intervention effectiveness when implemented at scale. A total of 347 children ages 6-20 months (52.7% male, 100% identified as mestizo) at risk for developmental difficulties were randomized to immediate or delayed CASITA. At 3 months after enrollment, the immediate arm showed significantly higher overall development, based on the Extended Ages and Stages Questionnaire and Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment scores (Cohen's ds = .36 and .31, respectively). Programs demonstrably effective at scale could help address children's development risks worldwide.
the COVID-19 pandemic modified the ways of teaching and learning, switching from face-to-face classes in classrooms and laboratories to non-synchronous or asynchronous non-face to face classes on virtual platforms. Human anatomy courses require internships to understand anatomical structures. Objective: it is intended to explore the perception of the students of Medicine, Nursing and Psychology about the methodologies, content and didactics of learning that were developed in three courses of human anatomy adapted to the pandemic. Methodology: cross-sectional observational study, using fifteen-question on an online survey, conducted at the end of semester 2020-I about perception; scope of expectations; instructions; learning activities; probability of recommending only virtual, combined or face-to-face courses and points for or against the virtual methodology used. The study in 157 students participated, this way: 56 % (88/157) medical anatomy course, 27 % (43/157) morphology course and 17 % (26/157) neuroanatomy course. Results: a variety of assessments were found for or against adaptations made for anatomical virtual education amid the contingency. However, points in favor of virtuality such as the possibility of recording and not physical displacement plus access to models of computer anatomy, fail to overcome the comprehension of a teacher and the enthusiasm that awakens the palpable.
Spanish Values represent an essential content of moral principles, and are manifested in the modes of action of people in social practice. Is very importan determine the values that need to be strengthened in students from various health careers for the task of facing COVID-19. A descriptive cross-sectional study was carried out with the total number of students from the careers: Medicine, Imaging, Occupational Therapy, Nursing, Neurophysiology, inserted in the research activity. Offices No. 4 and No. 21 Polyclinic: Salvador Allende. Boyeros Municipality. The questionnaire was used as an instrument for data collection, which provided the necessary information on which values need to be strengthened in the students during the actual participation in the assigned mission. Despite the different profiles of health careers, all the students, from their own experience, agreed to during the actual participation in the assigned mission.
Neuromyths are mistaken beliefs about the brain and its functioning and are based on pseudoscientific arguments or misinterpretations of certain findings.These erroneous ideas may stem from erroneous or poorly explained information from mass communication, ignorance of technical language in neuroscience, or limited access to primary sources. In assessing the level of neuromyths awareness in a Spanish-speaking sample of future teachers, and in seeking to replicate previous research on in-service teachers, this study applied a Spanish-translated version of the questionnaire created by Dekker et al. (2012). An instrument of 32 statements on the brain and learning, 12 of which were neuromyths, was applied to a sample of 99 early childhood education students from Chile and Spain. The results showed high neuromyth adhesion in both groups. Despite increasing evidence refuting some of these erroneous conceptions, these results conclusively showed a persisting neuroscientific knowledge gap in future educators. The consequences of such incomprehension or distortions of valid scientific knowledge in educational praxis impel us to insist on evidence-based education. Indeed, beyond simple reading, the careful selection and inclusion of scientific sources in the initial teacher training are essential for training teachers to read critically and reflectively; they will be able to make educational decisions based on available scientific evidence.
The effects of the current health sanitary crisis have required extreme measures of social distancing people to be quarantined, to safeguard the health of the population having repercussions at every level of our daily life, including the way we create the pedagogical space. For these reasons, the pedagogical space has needed to move from a physical space to a virtual space of social interactions. From the cognitive neurosciences, the mental processes that are part of the learning phenomenon, (such as memory, attention, emotions, among others) and computations made by the nervous systems seem to be based on, and underlie the operations, including and that are carried out in the nervous system. Those that are taking part of the learning phenomenon (such as perception, memory, attention, emotion, sleep, stress, addiction on learning processes, among others). Our work; this paper seeks, aims to discuss the influence of the current crisis context may be having on the nervous system's way of processing, and operates; therefore, and consequently, on the cognitive processes that allow our students to learn. In order to achieve that, our work discusses the effects of perception, attention, memory formation, sleep, emotions, stress and addictions on learning, highlighting how the actual sanitary crisis and the future lifting lockdown influence those cognitive processes. We address these effects, especially from the perspective of the current health crisis and the consequences of a future lack of focus.
Neurodidactic offers a valuable tool to guide the design of teaching improvements, analyzing the factors which determine learning from the neurophysiological reality of the subject.That's why this research aims to evaluate a teaching improvement based on neurodidactic for the third-year pediatric subject of medicine at the Andres Bello University. Methodology: Neurodidactic assessment identified the state of attention and biological reward as the weakest factors.To improve them, it was modified the kind of activities, the teaching role and it was incorporated audiovisual material.The quantitative evaluation instruments are related to the ratings and the perception questionnaire for students with a five-level Likert scale.The qualitative results correspond to the emerging categories of the teacher discourse analysis. Results:The quantitative results yielded an 89 % correct rating. There was a positive perception of the methodology in 80 % and of the use and quality of the audiovisual tool in 85 %. For the qualitative results, the subcategories attention and work methodology defined the predefined category classroom climate. In addition, another main category emerged defined as teacher emotionality, whose subcategories corresponded to paradigm shift and teaching skills, evaluating positive the students' content recovery after 18 months. Conclusion: As a conclusion, neurodidactic assessment is effective for the design of teaching improvements, since it allows selecting and implementing the appropriate activities to achieve well-evaluated innovations and, at the same time, supports the conscious strengthening of teaching skills.
The article shows the results of a research project whose objective was to promote the development of argumentative skills in a group of trainee teachers of the Chemistry degree program at the National Pedagogical University, through the design and application of a didactic unit on the implications of food chemistry in the development and prevention of the Parkinson's disease [PD] as a socio-scientific issue. Activities such as open questions, discussion forums, and search for possible nutritional alternatives in the prevention and treatment for the PD were implemented. In each stage, the level of argumentation was identified, and the conceptual content of each argument was analyzed. It should be noted that the students were able to achieve a higher level of argumentation than the initial one by using the knowledge acquired in the solution and search for alternatives through active and reflective learning. They built arguments based on theoretical and experimental grounds on different aspects of this controversy.
This article seeks to investigate contemporary discourses about bodily practices from the field of neurosciences to establish their effects on teaching. In turn, some lines of analysis will be proposed around the effects on Teaching of the irruption of Neurosciences in the educational field that allow the elaboration of a theory of Physical Education that renders the substantialist determinations of neurosciences inoperable, and operates teaching / enabling new uses of the body.
Though significant associations are known to exist between Executive Functions (EFs) and aggression, the role of EFs in the context of bullying has rarely been examined in populations of the Caribbean Region of Colombia. This study aims to analyze the relationship between school bullying and the EFs of children and adolescents residing in the Colombian city of Cartagena. The sample was conformed by 181 students from three schools who were evaluated using the abbreviated scale of the School Bullying Questionnaire and the Behavioral Evaluation of Executive Functions BRIEF - 2. The results showed association between various subfactors of the two instruments, which may be clinical indicators of executive dysfunction, mainly in the components of behavioral and emotional regulation, which would be associated with higher levels of school intimidation and symptoms related with bullying. The educational implications of these findings are discussed.
This paper examines the determinants of early childhood stimulation provided by caregivers using an ecological approach. The focus of our inquiry is on Chile, one of the most economically unequal coun-tries in the world. We use data from the Longitudinal Early Childhood Survey conducted in 2010 and 2012, which contains information regarding infants aged 30 months on average ( n = 8,251). Early child-hood stimulation is examined using a multidimensional index that comprises three domains: caregivers' stimulation of cognitive-language, sensorimotor, and socio-emotional development. Our dynamic models show that the main factors that lead to less stimulation are low caregiver education, low-income house-holds, and large families. Specifically, it was found that an additional child being born within a two-year period decreases stimulation, indicating possible competition between siblings due to time and resource restrictions in the household. Furthermore, caregivers' performance in personality (BFI) and linguistic in-telligence (WAIS language) tests was found to be a more significant factor than operational memory. Taken together, these findings suggest the need for initiatives aimed at increasing equality in early child-hood stimulation. (c) 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
After conducting a historical review and establishing the state of the art of adaptive e-Learning systems as well as emerging immersive technologies, the authors propose a software architecture model that includes the description of hardware and software elements for their development and implementation focused on educational activities, based on immersive technologies. The model will allow students to participate in experiences that are very close to reality according to their profiles and characteristics, previously identified by a neurofuzzy system and treated by a recommendation module, for the generation of experiences and learning objects according to the learning style, thus obtaining a high degree of personalization in the interaction with the students.
There are enough reasons to fully justify that studies about knowledge are relevant to interpret educational practice, though this argument is not recognized in great part of this educational research, in our midst. In this respect, first of all, this article poses the question about the meaning of the competence approach arguing that it leaves aside, precisely, the reconstruction of the objects of knowledge during the process of school learning. Secondly, this work argues about the strong trend - in many contemporary works about teaching - to study the relationship between teacher and student without considering the knowledge that is transmitted in the classroom. Thirdly, and most importantly, the article focuses on the direct transfer of the research results about the processes of teaching and learning carried out in different disciplines, sometimes with a prescriptive frame. The work shows that such transfer is particularly significant in the case of developmental psychology and neurosciences. Moreover, the article argues that this application has been responsible of the unawareness of the problems that knowledge poses in the present educational research. Finally, an emphasis in retrieving the knowledge issue in educational practices is presented, proposing, at the same time, a reshaping of the units of analysis.
Objective: to analyze the influence of emotions, as well as their relationship with sports performance in female athletes, especially in female soccer. Method: a search and selection of documents was carried out between 1990 and 2020 in the Sportdiscus, Scopus, Dialnet and Pubmed databases, with MesH terms such as emotions, athlete woman, soccer women, emotional intelligence, emotional control. Results: it was identified that there are various processes that condition emotions in female soccer players, in order to achieve maximum performances, regulated by psychoneurophysiological brain processes linking the limbic system, among which the function of the amygdala, the hippocampus, the hypothalamus, the fornix, the mammillary bodies, the cingulate cortex, and finally the orbito-frontal cortex, to help make decisions. All these elements stimulate, control and facilitate the athlete's learning and adaptation to the various variations of movement that she must face in the specificity of each sport. Conclusion: emotions must be taken into consideration in the training process, as an input to program training in order to obtain maximum sporting results, since it helps to condition the possible response to be executed, under an integrative neuropsychophysiological process.
Recent research has shown that working memory is essential for the development of mathematical skills. The aim of the study was to study the mediation of mathematical ability with respect to working memory in a group of students. The design is non-experimental, quantitative, and correlational; for the evaluation of variables the Neuropsychological Assessment of Children Battery and a test on mathematical skills in a group of primary school students were used. The data analysed indicate that a significant correlation is found between working memory and mathematical skills in the assessed group. A training of the working memory range can significantly strengthen the students' mathematical skills.
Introduction: Cerebral palsy (CP) is one of the main causes of physical disabilities in childhood. There is evidence that CP children display high levels of stress, which could interfere with learning processes and interpretation of relevant sensory information during motor skills acquisition and socialization. Objective: This study aims to compare basal levels of stress biomarkers (cortisol and alphaamylase) of healthy children (HC) and children with CP, and to investigate whether a physical therapy session using the neurodevelopmental technique (NDT) interferes with these levels. Methods: A cross-sectional design was used. A total of 86 children (HC: n = 45 and CP: n = 41) with matching age, sex, socioeconomic status, and sampling time. Salivary cortisol and alphaamylase levels were measured by means of electrochemiluminescence and spectrophotometry methods. A single saliva sample was collected in the HC group to determine basal levels. For CP group three samples were collected: a first sample was taken 20-30 min prior to the intervention, while two post-intervention samples were collected (5 and 20 min) to evaluate individual changes in salivary stress biomarkers. Results: Higher basal cortisol concentration was found in CP children when compared to HC group. Moreover, CP children showed a significant reduction in cortisol levels 20 min after NDT intervention. No significant differences were observed in alpha-amylase values. Conclusion: Present results show that CP causes alteration in basal cortisol values at childhood and suggest that CP children respond to environmental regulatory factors such as NDT, in attempt to reduce stress.
The purpose of the research was to demonstrate the positive influence of the neurolinguistic programming proposal in the potential improvement of the voluntary attention of schoolchildren in public institutions in the urban area of Buenaventura, Colombia. The methodology of this work is hypothetical deductive with an explanatory research level, the design in the study was experimental, with a quasi-experimental sub-design, longitudinal cut, where an evaluation pre-test was applied at the beginning of the academic cycle and a Post-test at the end, to two study groups divided as a control group and an experimental group, the strategy consisted of applying the neurolinguistic programming proposal to the experimental group to evaluate its effect and compare it with the control group. It was shown that there is a positive influence of the neurolinguistic programming proposal linked to learning styles in voluntary attention in transitional students in Buenaventura, Colombia.
This study investigated relationships between career adaptability and personality and pathological traits using the network analysis approach. We administered CAAS, BFI-2-S, and IDCP-2 to 630 working adults. We observed positive associations between personality and career adaptability and negative associations between pathological traits and career adaptability. This paper contributes to the understanding of the associations between career adaptability and Big Five personality traits and pathological traits. We found stronger associations between career adaptability and personality traits as compared to pathological traits. Our findings suggest that Neuroticism and Conscientiousness contribute more to adaptation to professional development tasks than do pathological traits.
This article presents a conception about the evaluation for the comprehensive care of children with neurological damage. The evaluation emphasizes the influences and the set of relationships established between them and the environment; to explain the importance that these come to have in child care, if it comes from the initial diagnosis, which is made from virtual environments. It is necessary to use the instruments, generate their implementation from the technological tools, to evaluate the possibility of this process by presenting a proposal on how to design them and from them connote the school-family articulation. The focus of this article values the role of those involved in each educational context to evaluate this process and assumes the result of the diagnosis as a validity criterion in the elaboration of the instruments as a practice associated with the work system in development centers. child from virtual environments. The results will be materialized in an evaluation that allows including the participation of teachers, professors and family members, from educational institutions through highlighting its integral, participatory and virtual nature.
TEducation as a whole, and university education in particular, deserves to be managed from a comprehensive perspective, that is, by combining efforts to ensure the achievement of educational quality, including learning. In this sense, the aim of the present work is to know the learning styles (LS) in students of Systems Engineering of the University National of center of Peru (UNCP), in a high Andean city (Huancayo, 3259 masl). The Neurolinguistic Programming (NLP) questionnaire of the VAK model (visual-auditory-kinaesthetic) was applied to 330 students (78 women and 252 men) in the 10 semesters of the 2020-I academic period. The predominant style was the visual one with 41% (135) students, registering significant difference in the LS by semesters (p<0.05), but not between gender (p>0.05). The predominant style of the career corresponds to the professional profile, which should be taken into account by the teachers in the teaching.
Biological systems exhibit strong dynamic variations; for example, a system may have a tendency towards either a steady state, periodic behaviour or chaotic oscillations. These findings, explained by dynamic systems theory, have allowed researchers to formally relate a wide variety of systems, such as the theory of rumour propagation, glucose metabolism or the activity of a neuronal circuit. Interestingly, among all of the dynamic characteristics mentioned, qualitative aspects frequently observed in highly complex systems can be obtained through the recursive application of a very simple parabolic function known as the logistic equation. Currently, the importance of these dynamic phenomena for biomedicine is recognized, but simple models such as the logistic equation have not been sufficiently exploited in the training of biologists and health professionals. We briefly review some properties of the dynamics governed by the logistic equation, with a direct application to the theory of cancer based on the dynamics of aneuploidy. We believe that this already known mathematical application is an opportunity for integrated teaching of mathematics and biology. For this purpose we finally provide an appendix with some activities, all of them related to this article, which can be practiced in a simple spreadsheet that we have shared.
The neurodevelopment of emotion recognition is critical to achieving an adequate Social Cognition. This ability is developed during the first years through primary social referents, and later peers are a source of training that facilitates insertion in social groups. Most of the emotion recognition tests used are based on reagents that use adult faces, which can be a problem when evaluating the ability to recognize basic emotions in children. The objective of the research was to study this ability in children, analyzing its incremental validity on the variables age, valence, gender and emotional category. The Recognition of Basic Emotions in Childhood Test (REBEC) was designed using 30 reagents based on faces of children expressing five basic emotions of different intensity (low, medium and high). The REBEC was administered to 214 children, between 6 and 12 years old. The maximum score was 30. The average (M) of correct answers was 19.86; with a standard deviation (SD) of +/- 4.12. The study sample was divided into seven groups according to the level of schooling. The group of 12 years-old obtained the highest yield (M) 22.18 +/- 4.12. The 6-years olds' group obtained the lowest yield (M) of 17.78 +/- 4.41. The (M) of hits in girls was 20.61 +/- 3.91; being of (M) 19.24 +/- 4.21 for children. The Emotion Happiness was the most recognized (M) 93.8%, followed by Anger (M) 75.1%, Sadness (M) 58.6%, Disgust (M) 56.3%, and Fear (M) 47, 4%, We analyzed the level of success according to age, configuring the trajectory of Neurodevelopment for each emotion, taking incorrect categorization of emotions into account: disgust, tended to be confused with Anger or Sadness. After obtaining the normative data of the REBEC Test and observing its psychometric properties and the sensitivity for the detection of the differences between groups, it is postulated as a valid and reliable instrument for the measurement of the facial expression abilities of the basic emotions in childhood.
This work is a product of the research project The discourses of sports teaching from the perspective of Physical Education. Analysis of the theoretical construction in the field since the beginning of Globalization. This project investigated in a panoramic and epistemological way the conformation of the discourses that are presented in the field of sports education, especially from the beginning of what is known as Globalization. This work is part of the final report that was presented to the corresponding authorities that evaluate and qualify the research projects in Argentina. This article presents the way in which this logic that emerged as a political-communicational change also conditioned the field of sports practices and their teaching.
Personality is a relevant feature to predict the student's academic behavior, and its association with academic emotional exhaustion is still a recent topic. The aim was determine the predictive ability of personality on academic emotional exhaustion in 453 college students (60.9% women) between ages 17 and 40 years old, who were assessed with the Emotional Exhaustion Scale and the Big Five Inventory-15p. Was implemented a regression multiple analysis on emotional exhaustion, with the personality traits as predictors. The findings shows that the personality traits explain significantly the emotional exhaustion (R-2>.20), and the neuroticism, extraversion and consciousness predict the emotional exhaustion. In conclusion, the predictive ability of personality on academic emotional exhaustion is significant. The practical consequences and limitations are discussed.
This study responds to a descriptive research, with a qualitative design, the sample is represented by students and teachers from the General Cerro Tigre Basic Education Center, in Panama. The research was carried out during the 2018 school period with the aim of analyzing the applicability of neuroscience in education to strengthen the teaching-learning process in primary school students. The data was obtained through the application of surveys and direct observation in the classroom. The results found allowed us to identify that the different learning processes can serve to reinforce the experience that teachers have, regarding the way in which people learn. In addition to informing about alternative approaches to teaching, aimed at promoting the acquisition of different types of skills, given this, teacher training must include elements of neuroscience that have to do with education, particularly in the ways in which they learn. the students.
Purpose - The purpose of this paper is fourfold: first, to analyse the relationship between executive functions and academic performance; second, to identify the level of prediction executive functions have on academic performance; third, to determine the correlation between executive functions and academic performance; and fourth, to compare executive functions based on the level of academic performance. Design/methodology/approach - The sample composed of 175 university students aged between 18 and 36 years (M=21.49, SD=3.22). The EFECO scale, the average student grade and a scale based on the diagnostic criteria for ADHD were used as measurement instruments. Findings - Difficulties in executive functions: Difficulties in working memory (r=-0.30,p=<0.01) and difficulties in conscious supervision of behaviour (r=-0.29,p <= 0.01) have an inversely proportional relationship to academic performance (the greater the deficit of executive functions, the lower the academic performance). The regression analysis showed that executive functions explain 31 per cent of the variance of academic performance (chi(2)(25)=43.81,p<0.001). The study found that there is a relationship between all the executive functions and students' behaviour in a medium to large magnitude. Research limitations/implications - A limitation of this study was the size of the sample as it is not representative of the country. Nevertheless, the correlation among the variables studied here has the necessary magnitude for the proposed correlations to be found. Nonetheless, it is necessary that we perform a study with a larger number of participants in order to achieve adequate extrapolation of the results. Practical implications - Data found in this study suggest that low academic performance of university students is related to a lower functionality of their executive functions. Originality/value The originality of the research lies in relating specific concepts of neuropsychology to explain the academic performance of university students. The research findings allow us to project new studies to improve the executive functions for the benefit of the university student.
Neurodiversity is an umbrella term, including dyspraxia, dyslexia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, dyscalculia, autistic spectrum and Tourette syndrome. The increasing number of students with learning difficulties associated with neurodiversity entering higher education (HE) poses a shared and growing challenge internationally for teachers and institutional leaders. This narrative synthesis draws together a corpus of international literature on how neurodiverse students experience higher education and the ways in which higher education institutions respond to the cluster of neurodiverse conditions. A systematic review was carried out to search, retrieve, appraise and synthesize the available evidence to provide an original contribution to the literature and significant insights of worth to higher education internationally. An inclusive approach to data extraction was used to ensure that all the relevant studies were included. All stages of the review process, including the initial search, screening, sample selection and analysis, are described. Three main themes and 11 subthemes were identified. Although the majority of publications focus on either dyslexia, autistic spectrum disorder, or ADHD, some common themes are evident in student experience across learning difficulties associated with neurodiversity. Although support services and technologies are available to meet students' specific needs, there is an apparent dislocation between the two. Fear of stigmatization and labelling worsens the divide between what is needed and what is available to ensure neurodiverse students' success in higher education, where good intentions are evidently not enough.
Teachers often face situations that require them to apply knowledge about the mind and brain to education. Past studies have indicated that even if teachers show interest in cognitive neuroscience, they show high rates of adhesion to neuromyths. In the most commonly used questionnaire, however, respondents do not compare neuromyths and correct information based on neuroscience. The present study proposes a multiple-choice questionnaire that presents scenarios occurring in school. The most commonly used and the new questionnaire were administered to 174 Italian teachers. In the most commonly used questionnaire, teachers generally had the same likelihood of accepting neuromyths as the literature reports. In the new questionnaire, the levels of both general knowledge and beliefs about neuromyths were significantly lower. Moreover, it suggests that teachers' adhesion to neuromyths in realistic situations does not match their explicit beliefs. Thus, the present research proposes that the use of questions based on feasible scenarios is a useful method to assess neuromyths.
This article's objective is to highlight the importance of sensory integration strategies in the classroom to encourage the needs of children's integral development and their neurological processes, allowing them to assimilate and interpret the sensory information received to give an appropriate response. It was proposed to hold playful workshops, taking into account concepts and tools from the sensory integration theory. The study used a sample of 40 students, between the ages of 4 and 6 years old, using a mixed methodology - considering statistical data collective as quantitative and workshop observation as qualitative. A pre-test and a post-test were applied, corresponding to the abbreviated scale of development, and ten intervention workshops of sensory integration, detecting the need for strengthening the development of sensory processes. It was concluded that workshops motivated students, who responded adequately to the stimuli: tactile system with 95%, proprioception system with 80%, and in the vestibular system with 89%. Similarly, difficulties were detected in some students, who will continue to be supported.
The research analyzes the extent to which YouTube can be used as a research tool. For the analysis, the design published by Journal of Child Neurology [14] was followed. To this end, thirty videos are selected on three different topics, which are analyzed for their effectiveness in terms of technical concepts and for their reliability with respect to the information, they need; two videos, the highest and lowest score, are selected for an experimental group, comparing and contrasting results with a control group. The analysis shows that the videos with the highest scores obtained better grades. It can also be determined that YouTube can be used as a tool for documentary research, however, the correct search, selection and reliability practices are still the key to making the most of this platform. A rubric is also proposed to evaluate videos for using documentary research.
In the current scientific literature refers to the contributions from the Neurosciences for the understanding of learning processes. This is how, as well as from the branches of Neurosciences, such as Cognitive Neuroscience, specific contributions are born that facilitates the understanding of these processes. On the other hand, Neuroeducation as a new discipline proposes to take these contributions from the Neurosciences for the improvement of educational practices, and thereby optimize learning. The objective of this article is to analyze the theoretical contributions in force from the Neurosciences, to understand the learning situated in educational contexts. For this, the relationship of the concepts Neuroscience, Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroeducation is alluded to. In addition, the main contributions from the Neurosciences are analyzed to understand the processes of neuroplasticity, and the impact of emotions, sleep quality, physical activity and social contexts in learning. Finally, we discuss the importance of these contributions and how they guide the teaching role and educational practices so that they allow for meaningful learning.
Bullying is a worrisome reality due to its harmful consequences. Although many constructs have been associated with bullying victimization and aggressive behavior, its relationship both with loneliness and personality has received little attention. The main objective of this study is to identify differences in bullying victimization and aggressive behavior scores based on a typology of personality and loneliness profiles. Six hundred and four middle school students (54% female) from the province of Leon (Spain), aged between 12 and 15 (M-age=13.3 +/- 1.12), completed the Eysenck Junior Personality Inventory, the Loneliness Scales, the Bullying Victimization Scale, and the Short Aggression Questionnaire. Correlations, linear regressions, and latent profile analysis (LPA) were performed. Age (beta=-0.90, p < 0.001), peer loneliness (beta=0.70, p < 0.001), isolation (beta=0.18, p < 0.001), neuroticism (beta=0.06, p=0.048), and psychoticism (beta=0.06, p=0.026) predicted bullying victimization. Moreover, the LPA distinguished five distinct profiles based on the loneliness and personality subscales. The disruptive and peer-alienated profiles obtained the highest scores in bullying victimization, and the former also had the highest aggression scores. Loneliness and personality are closely linked to victimization and aggressive behavior. It is crucial for health and school communities to identify and address these vulnerabilities for the prevention of bullying victimization and aggression.
This study aims at checking the effects of an early intervention program (EIP) on the neuropsychomotor development (NPMD) and quality of life (QoL) of 4-18 months old babies attending daycare, following the biopsychosocial (BPS) model of health and the International Classification of Functioning Disability and Health (ICF). It was a quasi-experimental cross-over study, with the evaluations (NPMD and QoL) and interventions (locomotor, stabilizer and manipulative in a circuit format) of 66 babies carried out in the daycare, following an EIP, twice a week, during 4 weeks. The EIP for favoured motor behaviours acquisition, demonstrating that the percentage of babies with risk/delay decreased just after the EIP and positive effects were identified in Physical Capacity in QoL. It is concluded that the proposed EIP program for 4-18 months old infants in daycare showed positive effects on NPMD and QoL, including domains of ICF of function, activity and participation.
This article analyzes the political-pedagogical decisions concerning to the definition of the teaching object in initial literacy, and the recognition of students as knowledge-bearing citizens with the right to make reflections and transform unconventional concepts about writing in teaching situations. In order to deepen the meaning of these statements, from a constructivist perspective, we analyze the children's writings in early childhood education, and the registers of a classroom interactions when children were challenged to write. The interpret the student's conceptual construction processes is central to understand the value of children's writing transformation and the kind of problems that educators need to raise in teaching situations. Finally, we explicit some theoretical discussions on the phonological awareness perspective and the contributions of the neurosciences.
The following paper presents the main results of exploratory research oriented to the design and implementation of a pattern recognition system for flatfoot identification in children between 5 and 6 years. Patterns were determined from texture analysis of foot thermographic images, and from contour analysis of footprint images. For each case, an artificial neuronal network was trained, with base in a back-propagation algorithm. In each trial, 70 % of data were used for training, and 30 % for validation. For experiments done, success rates greater than 80 % were achieved. The best results were reached with contour patterns reduced by principal components analysis, PCA, in a binary system, with a success rate of 90.84 % in cross-validation. Results are a contribution to the study of diagnostic techniques for flatfoot treatment through the use of technologic tools.
This work is a product of the research project: The discourses of the teaching of sports from the perspective of physical education. Analysis on the theoretical construction in the field since the beginning of Globalization, belonging to the Research Incentives Plan of the Argentine Nation, based in the Faculty of Humanities and Education Sciences of the National University of La Plata. Using the techniques of theoretical research, this project explores in a panoramic way the formation of discourses on sports practice and teaching, especially from what is known as Globalization. The objective it was establish the existing relationships between these two categories, to think about the conception of the sport that is transmitted from the texts.
Memory facilitates teaching and learning. This pre-experimental design study explores how knowledgeable teachers are about memory and consists of two stages that serve as baselines for future studies. A group of 196 teachers that taught all types of grade levels were asked to answer a two-part survey. The teachers were attendees at a Neuroeducation training session that was held in the city of Resistencia, Argentina in 2017. The data was analyzed on Excel spreadsheets. According to the results obtained, 65% of the teachers stated having knowledge about the concept of memory and 15% reported having none. On the other hand, 72% said that they had minimal knowledge about memory as it relates to learning whereas 13% stated having none. The workshop proved to significantly increase the level of knowledge among the attendees regarding concept of memory (76%), different types of memory (52%) and how it relates to learning (55%). It can be concluded that knowledge about how the student brain learns and, specifically, how the memory process is interrelated to learning, is essential for teacher training since it allows for better planning and more effective teaching.
In this paper, we provide a mental-chronometry measurement (reaction time, RT) and a mathematical model to support the hypothesis that writing increases long-term memory (LTM) consolidation. Twenty-five subjects read short passages, wrote or spoke summaries of the texts, and performed a word-recognition episodic memory task. In the recognition task, participants responded faster in the written condition than in the spoken condition. We fit 15 driift-diffusion models to the accuracy and RT data to explore which components of the memory retrieval process reflect the learning effect of writing. Model selection methods showed that the nondecision parameter accounts for this effect, suggesting that initial stages of learning through writing are associated with fast episodic-memory retrieval. We suggest that the current approach could be used as a tool to compare different models of writing to learn. Furthermore, we show how combining mental chronometry, evidence-accumulation models of behavioral data, and dynamic causal models of functional magnetic resonance imaging could further the goal of understanding how writing affects learning. With a broader perspective, this approach provides a feasible experimental link between the field of writing to learn and the cognitive neurosciences.
Motor development is a transformation that occurs in humans as a result of the evolution of the life cycle, from birth to old age, so it is important to maintain their levels of development through motor activities that generate changes of various kinds (biological, psychological, anthropological, psychomotor, neurophysiological, among others). Recognizing the importance of the contribution from the school to the evolutionary process through good motor practices in preschool children, a study was carried out in 45 pre-school education institutions in the municipality of Bello-Colombia. The research revealed information about the knowledge and application of theoretical concepts that teachers give in the physical activities of preschool, through a questionnaire that inquires about the performance of teachers in the infant stage in the area of motor development. For the presentation of results, the proposal of Sanz et al. (2013), which comprises eight dimensions for the approach of motor education in terms of health. The results indicate unfavorable effects in the acquisition of improvements in the development of basic motor skills and health habits.
In the article is emphasis in the placed on the application of transdisciplinarity between Neuroscience and education and advocates the approval of disciplines such as Neuroeducation, NeuroDidactic and Neuropedagogy in teacher training for the realization of results. However, in a diagnostic study conducted to teachers of the University of Cienfuegos, Cuba it was found that the knowledge they have is still insufficient, with respect to the contents of Neuroscience applicable to education. Likewise, the deficiencies of the treatment of the contents in the current Study Plans and Discipline Programs were verified, hence the need to include the neuroscience treatment in the content of the initial teacher training is identified as a scientific problem. Among the main results is the lack of preparation received by teachers in training in terms of neuroscientific knowledge as well as the insufficient treatment of the subject in the disciplines and subjects that contribute to their professional training to face the pedagogical activity.
Attention is one of the main cognitive skills that is constantly used in everyday life. However, various factors can be diminished and even blocked by various disorders, diseases or behaviors that affect people's performance. To analyze the brain signals, the Neurosky MindWave EEG device is required, this device determines the levels of attention of people when they perform some activity and Arduino for data capture. This article compares data obtained from reading the level of care of people of different ages and sex using the Neurosky and Arduino Uno devices. The results obtained show that women (sex) and adults (age) have greater stability of attention over time, and that men (sex) and youth (age) get to obtain higher levels of attention.
Although prevalence of developmental dyscalculia is estimated between 5% and 7%, it did not receive a great deal of public recognition as in the case of dyslexia. This factor, added to the lower availability of studies regarding this specific learning disorder, increases difficulties in inclusive classrooms, where teachers are required to meet heterogeneous educational needs. At present, educational interventions for dyscalculia are demanded to practitioners outside schools, due to a lack of didactical instruments that can help teachers in their daily work, especially during primary school years, when diagnosis of dyscalculia is made. This article presents a case study involving two primary school students, attending an Italian public school, one with dyscalculia and one with difficulties in mathematics. Based on recent studies of cognitive and developmental neuroscience, an educational intervention has been proposed to support and reinforce the understanding numerosities, as an essential skill to build further mathematical knowledge. According to the learning by doing approach, several activities with manipulatives specifically designed for mathematical learning (ArtecBlocks, interlocking cubes) were proposed to the students, in order to combine gamified manual activity with the opportunity of learning by doing, supporting intrinsic motivation while decreasing math anxiety. Following a one-month training, the student with difficulties in mathematics showed limited improvements, probably due to an increase in her confidence, while the student with dyscalculia showed significant improvements not only in counting, but also in calculation procedures and recall of arithmetic facts, with an increase in accuracy and control over the result and a reduction in response times. Findings suggest the feasibility of the learning by doing approach with the use of manipulatives, which enhances inclusion and learning personalization, but also confidence towards mathematics.
The ubiquitous learning is situated, contextual and incorporated to daily life as posed by social constructivism. Within a ubiquitous learning environment, the mediation among the participants of the process occurs through didactic dialogue supported by ubiquitous informatics. In this setting, creativity and criticality are both process-conditioning competences and in turn provide feedback to specific cognitive functions. The people-computer interaction is implemented through an interface as part of a cultural, physical and social environment that requires the understanding of the mental processes allowing to perceive, act, learn and remember from the neuroscientific perspective. The proposal is framed within the field of the Man-Computer Interaction discipline and tries to deepen the study of the incidence of human aspects on the interface-construction process of interfaces for ubiquitous learning environments. This process calls for research since it is perceived only empirically out of the transformations occurring at people's cognitive, cultural and social levels among others though there still are other research programs on this topic being developed. In this paper, the concepts of criticality and creativity considered as key factors in human learning are introduced first; then, that of ubiquitous learning and later, the ubiquitous learning environment used is described. In this model, the relationships among elements and interfaces are identified and, in turn, the UX approach is proposed for the design by recognizing the human aspects involved. Lately, it is constructed the conclusion and future work lines that will be part of the output of the research project accredited by the CICyT-UNSE entitled Interdisciplinary Conceptual Implications in the search for creativity and criticality for computer-supported and knowledge-management-mediated collaborative and distributed environments.
Numerous investigations have shown that many students, at all educational levels, have difficulties with Mathematics. The experts consider that both students and teachers face more problems in teaching and learning processes in both algebra and geometry. In particular, in geometry, the level of abstraction and difficulty in the calculation of areas and volumes makes its contents very complicated for high school students. The immediate explanation that can be given to this problem is that in most school education systems, the contents of geometry are presented as finished products of the mathematical activity. On the other hand, when presenting the contents, it is generally not considered that people learn differently and that one of those differences responds to the way the student receives and processes the information. In the described context, a didactic sequence is proposed that guides the teaching-learning processes of rectangular prisms. Students' learning styles are considered in a global way and a set of activities is proposed that make the training process to be interactive that is attractive for the students. The use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) as tools that facilitate, motivate and reinforce the educational process is integrated into the sequence. The proposal is addressed to students of the 1st year of secondary school and to include the learning styles, they have been taken the Neuro Linguistic Programming Model and the Kolb Model. Opening, development and closing didactic strategies are used. All of this is done in order to promote significant learning in the student. The proposal considers two types of activities: those carried out with the teacher that lead to guided learning and those autonomous learning activities. The use of Geogebra is proposed, as ICT tool that favour the appropriation of contents. In order to favour citizen competence, activities are contextualized in environmental conservation. The students are asked to make some inquiries information so that the search and information management competence would also be developing. It is also expected to contribute to the social and learning to learn abilities of the student. As a consequence of the design of the didactic sequence a set of reflections and conclusions has been reached.
This chapter highlights the learning difficulties and the intervention processes that were carried out with the students and identified the origin and evolution of this problem. The conceptual foundation on learning difficulties explores the theory from the voice of experts and the school environment as the scenario where this topic is questioned and constructed, based on four axes: learning difficulties, specific language difficulties, difficulties of specific learning in mathematics and basic learning devices. These are approached from two perspectives: clinical and pedagogical. Although this research may have an etiological component in the neurological aspect, the context affects the development, diagnosis, evaluation and timely intervention, bearing in mind that these difficulties are the result of the student's experiences, both at school and in the neighborhood or home. The results show that in the academic community studied there is no conceptual clarity about the learning difficulties: generally, they are confused with the disability and are attributed to the student's lack of motivation. Regarding the diagnosis, it is pointed out that there is no service protocol: students with problems are referred to the support professional, which makes learning difficulties in the educational context invisible.
The requirements have become a key aspect in the development of computer applications. However, a large number of software projects have difficulties due to poor definition, specification or requirement management. Therefore, it is important to investigate the quality characteristics of the software requirements and the metrics that measure them. This article aims to determine the quality characteristics of the software requirements, their concepts and the existing metrics to measure them, in order to obtain parameters that guide the process of capturing, specifying and evaluating the requirements. In order to know the information available about this topic, a systematic literature mapping (SMS) was developed, contemplating a search in different academic databases such as ACM, IEEE, SCOPUS, and WOS. Given the limited number of items found, the technique snowball should be used in addition. From the SMS, 18 primary items were obtained, of which 2 belonged to ACMDL, 6 to SCOPUS and 10 to snowball. The analysis of the information reflects reduced research on the quality characteristics of the software requirements, and partial efforts to address part of the problem from other areas such as linguistics, psychology, neuroscience and mathematics are evident.

Leadership in woman or female leadership is currently gaining some focus and interest in research. In the field of neuropsychology, the number of women has been increasing over the past three decades, but one has to observe that women are still the minority at leading positions within most neuropsychological organizations, leading journals' editorial boards, and prominent academic positions. Research on this topic has shown a series of strategic elements that allow achieving leadership positions for woman in neuropsychology including features like knowing their own leadership personal style, being open and transparent, being responsible for their own mistakes, using a collaborative approach, delegating tasks when it is necessary, looking for visibility and connections, keeping focused, having confidence, and gathering information. This paper presents an example of leadership in a work team of women researchers in the field of neuropsychology of mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) in Colombia. MPS is a rare type of genetic disorder that affects a small number of people. Our paper demonstrates how the distribution of duties according to the personal styles, collaboration with other colleagues, delegating tasks, and looking for visibility and connections might allow to form a work team with diverse characteristics for advancing in the research on the neuropsychological aspects of the MPS, a pioneering field in Colombia. Moreover, we contribute to the understanding of the disease by the patients' families and help creating the possibility of carrying out future research related to combating this disease in Colombia as well as worldwide.
In this article we review the foundational literature of the development of thought in interaction with creativity as an essentially human activity, analyzed in a university context. The research addresses a global university environment in which creativity, on the one hand, is strengthened by art and play, and on the other, due to globalized phenomena, is subjected to innovation, economic productivity and marketing, among others, which Modify the educational reality. The relevance of the study is in a situation of generational impact, given the increasing difficulty of university professors in attracting students to knowledge, since they are currently seduced by contemporary hedonism and social life. The research had a mixed method in the first stage by a hermeneutic activity, then deep interviews were conducted with specialized teachers who develop creative didactics, and finally two courses were conducted with teachers to put into practice the creative teaching proposal. As a main conclusion, it was argued that thought develops in relation to the type of society from which it emerges, and in the university classroom emanates from creativity. It is a dual activity, logical-emotional, and the result of this interaction flows knowledge as a social construction.
The early detection of readers with difficulty is fundamental for the implementation of remediation programs. In Latin America there are few tools to assess pre-literacy skills. Naming speed and phonological awareness are considered the main predictors of reading. The aim of this work was to adapt the RAN/RAS (Rapid Automatized Naming/Rapid Alternating Stimulus) test published by Wolf and Denkla (2005) to Spanish and to determine the correlation of the naming measures with reading between preschool and 3rd grade of Primary School. For this purpose, 142 children of ages between 5 and 8 years were evaluated in rapid naming tasks, phonemic awareness, phonemic segmentation, letter, word, and pseudo word reading, and comprehension of texts according to the school year. The results obtained show that the naming speed is a good predictor of reading and correlates with measures of fluency and accuracy. These results confirm that establishing normative data in the Latin American population would be very useful for the early detection of children at risk.
In general, Space Sciences data exploration is thought to be suitable for people who do not have Neurological Disorders (ND) that may impair reading (RI), and are not blind or visually impaired (BVI). Data exploration methods used in these fields are generally visual, and do not provide the accessibility to allow full participation of blind and visually impaired individuals in the field. This has been the case even after evidence that sound increases the sensitivity to events in data that would otherwise be undetected. A set of tools that guarantees a thorough data inspection, and assures the access to the same amount and quality of information to all, is useful for everyone. The present project, devoted to design a new user centered software to produce audio-visual outputs from astrophysical data, integrates multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary astronomers, engineers, computer specialists, software designers, educators, disability specialists, bioengineers, neurobiologists, and sociologists, both blind and sighted, and addresses the topics of accessibility to astronomical data, The possibility of exploring the bibliographic databases (ADSABS, among others), creation of a new multimodal access prototype, creation of an accessible, user-centered (from back end to front end), human-computer interface suitable for collection, sonification and analysis of astrophysical data, and the efficiency, utility and effectiveness of the resource in different cultural environments and at different levels of expertise. In this contribution, we present the first results related to the creation and application of the techniques and tools proposed, taking into account that the focus of this research is on the knowledge in the field of physics and astrophysics, but can be scalable to other areas of human activity so that people with other learning styles can have equal opportunities. Finally, this project is based on the premises of addressing the technical challenges in basic research to achieve the promised benefits of Big Data, which is of world-wide interest.
This paper presents the psychometric properties and an initial validation study of the Executive Functioning Scale for Children (EFS). The EFS assesses parents' and teachers' perception of the frequency of certain behaviors schoolchildren may present when performing tasks that demand attentional control, inhibitory control, metacognition, organization, planning, and cognitive flexibility. The participants were 307 schoolchildren, male and female (48.2% female), between 6 and 10 years of age (M = 7.69, SD = 1.07), belonging to the middle-low SES (17%) and low SES (83%). The children attended three primary schools from first to 4th grade in the province of Mendoza, Argentina. The informants were the teachers. The results indicated that the EFS offers a unidimensional structure, adequate internal consistency, temporal stability, and predictive capacity of school performance. These results suggest that the EFS is an ecologically valid and reliable assessment instrument that can be used to complement children's neuropsychological evaluation.
Since more fifteen years a multidisciplinary and scientific collaboration between Group of Speech Processing (GSP) from Universidad de Oriente and the Medical Consultation for Infant Neurodevelopment and Disability (CPNDI) of Santiago de Cuba have been successfully developed. Notwith-standing the successes and advances of the CPNDI, certain difficulties limit its action and impact as: non automation of the information flow related to the study of neurodevelopment and children's disability, the delayed detection of some cases of infants who then make their debut with deviations in their neurodevelopment and associated disabilities. Currently, a project is being developed to deploy a Management Computer System of the CPNDI (named PMSIND). This web-based system will need another support system that will allow it to incorporate software packages and diagnostic methodology both linked to the infant cry analysis, which will facilitate an early detection of neonates at risk to be treated later by the CPNDI. The main objective of the paper is the development and implementation of this support system made up of non-proprietary software tool. The support system developed by the authors should not only help to manage the clinical information of the neonate at risk, but also must guarantee the availability of all information with diagnostic value from the Infant Crying Analysis that facilitates the early detection of infants at risk to be followed up by the CPNDI.
It is well known that educators such as Froebel, Dienes, and Gattegno recommend periods of free play with material objects before introducing mathematical questions designed to lead learners to encounter and articulate underlying mathematical relationships. In this chapter, I challenge a proposed distinction between play and exploration (Panksepp, Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and animal emotions. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1998) in the context of mathematics, and I advance the conjecture that inviting learners to engage in a preliminary mental free play with the situation or context proposed in a word problem could serve to enrich learners' awareness of the underlying mathematical relationships which are needed in order to resolve the specific problem. Also, after solving the initial problem, playing with a successful method and varying quantities in the problem can enrich the example space of solvable problems and increase the chance of similar actions becoming available when faced with similar problems in the future. When teachers act playfully with tasks that they are going to assign to learners, they may find pedagogical affordances opening up of which they were previously unaware.
For children with cerebral palsy, therapy is an intervention mechanism to support their development in areas of motor, cognitive, sensory, communication, social and emotional functioning. With recent advances in robotics, the use of assistive social robots in therapeutic intervention protocols is ideally positioned to make an impact in this area. The proposal of this work is to present the treatment protocol using a humanoid robot for rehabilitation processes in physical therapy of two children with cerebral palsy who usually attend therapy at the SURGIR Neurorehabilitation Center in the city of Cali, Colombia. The developed protocol highlights the importance of the SMART therapeutic objectives and the methodology developed, presenting a formal way to achieve a positive intervention in rehabilitation processes for children with cerebral palsy.
The influence of a given event on long-term memory formation of another one has been a relevant topic of study in the neuroscience field in recent years. Students at school learn contents which are usually tested in exam format. However, exam elevates the arousal state of the students acting as a mild stressor that could influence another memory formation ongoing process. Thus, in this study we examine in high school students the effect of exams on long-term retention of unrelated information, learned at different times before or after the exams. Our results show that exams are not innocuous and that they could improve or reduce the retention of temporarily associated content. These effects did not show gender differences. Our findings should alert teachers about the side effects of exams on the learning of other content within the same school day.
Interest in Neuroeducation is growing and its effectiveness improving aspects of the educational context seems to be demonstrated and made concrete more and more although the history of this discipline is relatively short (it is only in the last decade that the methods derived from neuroscience have been applied to the academic field). In order to better understand basic concepts from Neuroeducation or Child Neuropsychology and, above all, to provide a practical proposal for the application of Neurodidactics in the classroom, this bibliographic review article summarizes at a first moment the basic points of these disciplines, to enhance both, academic and executive performance, in the educational context. Neuroeducation is an area in which the Executive Functions constitute a new construct that has gained special interest in recent years. This paper proposes in a second part, two examples of intervention programs on metacognition and self-regulation capacities, applicable or adaptable to the classroom or to other educational activities for children in pre-school education and from 10 to 14 years old.
The consumption of psychoactive substances in young people is alarming and it is the duty of educational institutions to respond to this great challenge with projects that prevent and mitigate the problem; For this reason, this research project implemented a community participation strategy based on project-based learning, PBL, as an innovative methodology in the teaching-learning processes mediated by ICT. The PBL methodology offers students the possibility to manage, analyze, and synthesize a final product that specifically responds to the challenge formulated by each research team. This project has its theoretical foundation in the contribution of neuroscience, which was very important to understand the functioning of the brain, and the affectations due to the consumption of psychoactive substances PAS. An analysis of the incidence of the pedagogical strategy showed that the greater the knowledge of risk factors and the negative impact of psychoactive substances, the greater the prevention of drug consumption by students
The self-regulation of learning aims to generate an autonomous process in the students; Based on this approach, we consider that the educational task should be directed to the formation of competences that allow learning to learn, thus achieving a constant and continuous learning throughout life in the different situations and areas in which it must develop and, fundamentally, , enable spaces in which the student generates new ways of thinking and behavior. For all this, we began to investigate and look for alternatives and varied strategies to be able to modify the way in which each teacher brings knowledge to the students, focusing on the methodology and teaching strategies, looking for students to get involved in their own learning, Be responsible for it and be aware of the changes that occur in them. To address this situation, from the neurodidactics we create projects in different curricular spaces, where the teachers propitiated that the learning is centered on the student, considering it as the axis of the process, recognizing, accepting and respecting that it is he who realizes an active construction of knowledge with the guide of the teacher and his classmates. Throughout this paper we present the articulation from theory to practice through the different curricular spaces.
Background Several studies show that socio-economic status (SES) is related to the developmental trajectories of children with typical development (TD). However, few studies have analysed this relationship regarding children with neurodevelopmental disorders such as Down syndrome (DS). In this paper, we analyse the impact of SES in the neurodevelopmental trajectories of children with DS in comparison with children with TD. Method Cognitive, language, motor and socioemotional development were assessed in 31 children with DS between the ages of 15 and 8o months from high to low SES backgrounds. Data from this group were compared with data from a sample of 72 children with TD randomly selected from the Longitudinal Survey of Early Childhood. We analyse and compare these two groups using the developmental trajectories method Results The results show delayed onsets for the four abilities measured in children with DS compared with children with TD from high to low SES. In the comparison of the developmental trajectories, we found that the differences between the neurodevelopmental trajectories in DS and 113 vary according to SES. High SES show differences only in language development, while low SES show significant differences in cognitive, language and socio-emotional development. Conclusions The results indicate that SES is a factor that could impact the developmental trajectories of children with DS. Although the differences between children with DS and with TD are similar at the beginning regardless of SES, the developmental trajectories are slower in children with DS of low SES than in children of high SES. We argue that the differences are related to the complex interaction of several biological and cultural factors associated with SES. Some specific hypotheses about nutrition, health care access, quality of education and parenting practices are presented, but more research in this area is needed to fully understand these results.
Reports regarding behavior in children and adolescents in school age are useful to detect risk groups in educational as well as clinical environments. Usually, these reports are obtained from questionnaires that are impaired by non-solved methodological problems. This study explores the principal factors of the Child and Adolescent Behavior Questionnaire, an instrument previously designed to assess healthy children and adolescents through teacher reports in Cuba. A non-probabilistic sample of 6,993 children and adolescents from Centro Habana municipality was assessed: 4,991 (71.37%) were elementary school students, aged 6-12 years; 2,002 were junior high school students, aged 11-15 years; 3,528 were females (50.45%), 3,465 were males. According to an iterated principal factor analysis with varimax-normalized rotation, three factors explained 70.94% of the total variance: Behavioral Control, School Cognitive Performance, and Socialization. Possible relations between these results, psychological development, neuromaturation, and education are discussed.
Sensory integration is a neuropsychological process which allows an appropriate processing of information, with implications for cognitive functionality, learning, affectivity, and behavior. Its deficiency affects 35% of students in South America and its complex presentation confuses professionals who seek to classify it. For this reason, a study with a quantitative approach is constructed; it describes the variables of sensory integration, learning, affectivity, and behavior in a non-probabilistic sample of 66 students between 7 and 10 years old from a public school. The results confirm the existence of a sensory integration problem in 46% of people, difficulties in learning to read of 58% and in learning calculus of 93%, anxiety of 20 and 35%, depression between 15 and 31%, and behavioral problems of 15%, for which identification and intervention programs in schools are required.
Visualizing anatomical structures and functional processes in three dimensions (3D) are important skills for medical students. However, contemplating 3D structures mentally and interpreting biomedical images can be challenging. This study examines the impact of a new pedagogical approach to teaching neuroanatomy, specifically how building a 3D-model from oil-based modeling clay affects learners' understanding of periventricular structures of the brain among undergraduate medical students in Colombia. Students were provided with an instructional video before building the models of the structures, and thereafter took a computer-based quiz. They then brought their clay models to class where they answered questions about the structures via interactive response cards. Their knowledge of periventricular structures was assessed with a paper-based quiz. Afterward, a focus group was conducted and a survey was distributed to understand students' perceptions of the activity, as well as the impact of the intervention on their understanding of anatomical structures in 3D. Quiz scores of students that constructed the models were significantly higher than those taught the material in a more traditional manner (P<0.05). Moreover, the modeling activity reduced time spent studying the topic and increased understanding of spatial relationships between structures in the brain. The results demonstrated a significant difference between genders in their self-perception of their ability to contemplate and rotate structures mentally (P<0.05). The study demonstrated that the construction of 3D clay models in combination with autonomous learning activities was a valuable and efficient learning tool in the anatomy course, and that additional models could be designed to promote deeper learning of other neuroanatomy topics. Anat Sci Educ 11: 137-145. (c) 2017 American Association of Anatomists.
Today there are many children with Down Syndrome (DS) who have difficulties in the teaching-learning process in general and in particular in mathematics. These difficulties have their primary origin in the intellectual disability that is manifested to a greater or lesser extent in people with DS (PDS) due to a genetic alteration characterized by an additional copy of chromosome 21. This genetic imbalance causes a decrease in the number of neurons and synaptic connections which in turn makes mental and motor processes slower for them than for other people. Notwithstanding the preceding, the population retains its capacity for learning and improvement, even there is no limit to the development of their skill is as long as they provide the right incentives. On the other hand, ICTs have proven to be an inclusive tool with the population in cognitive impairment such as DS. Experts affirm that these people do have interest and can make use of technologies, which constitute a valuable instrument to increase the probability of becoming more independent and active in the community. In this sense, actions have been undertaken to promote the social inclusion of this population by promoting access to ICT, respecting their right to access information and communication. In this way, the digital divide is reduced, and educational, labor and social inclusion are favored. According to the above, the design of a prototype of an educational video game in mathematics that is inclusive with PDS was proposed. This game is based on three own activities of daily living of people who require basic knowledge in mathematics. Each of the activities starts at a basic level of difficulty, and to the extent that the user manages to perform each of them adequately, the difficulty of them will increase. The objective of the first activity of the game is to identify shapes and colors correctly, the other is to count, and the last is to organize elements according to form. Since some users with or without DS can have limitations in language development, the game was designed so that from the same user interaction with the application could be obtained data showing some aspects of the teaching-learning process and familiarization and use of the proposed tool. These analytical data extracted directly from the interaction with the game facilitates the evaluation of it, especially in populations where language is not fully developed and thus have limitations in intelligibility and speech.
This paper is based on the second stage of a design-based research (DBR) project encompassing the initial prototyping of virtual reality (VR) simulation in paramedicine education using self-reported and biometric feedback data. In this discussion paper we present the range of reflections and theoretical possibilities that arose from the piloting experience and their implications in redesigning practice in paramedicine education. We focus on the foundational literature and epistemological understandings coming from neurophenomenological cognitive science applied in technology-enhanced learning, using mixed reality (MR) in paramedicine simulation learning as a case. We do so following the logic of a DBR methodological framework, in part demonstrating the usefulness of DBR when reflecting on applied practice to inform newer theoretical developments, leading to further integrated solutions in future practice. In addition, we also put attention on a conceptual shift from a focus on VR, to a focus on MR with emphasis on the associated benefits offered by MR learning situations within paramedicine education. Finally, we discuss the benefits of incorporating self-reported and biometric feedback data in paramedicine education in particular, and in technology-enhanced learning in general, for the design of meaningful learning experiences informed by emotional and physiological responses of learners.
Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder is the most common childhood neurodevelopment disorder that globally affects 3 to 5 percent of children. Several computerized training programs for ADHD have been designed to improve executive functions. With technological advancement, new approaches can be used to develop interactive experiences with visual effects. In this sense, Serious Games have recently shown great potential to be adopted in this psychotherapeutic area. One critical challenge is developing serious games using emerging technologies like Augmented Reality (AR) focus on cognitive-behavioral therapies for children with this disorders in scholar-age. This paper aim is to improve ADHD children's attention and train them using an Augmented Reality Serious Games (ARSG) prototype. It was designed with the help of experts, workshops with designers, the guidance of psychologists and medical doctors specialized on ADHD, by using a methodical game design approach along with natural user interface (Kinect). Findings of this case study showed that player's attention and retention increased, improving their tolerance for frustration and with a significant time reduction in the game activities.
This study was performed to to evaluate and recognize the teachers' knowledge about the ADHD/ADD in their students. In the investigation, we identified the teachers' learning methods applied when they recognize the deficit on the students. The Attention Deficit Disorder and Hyperactivity (known as ADD and ADHD) is a neurological condition that might affect the physical, social, and emotional condition of an individual. The common symptoms that might be presents are: distraction, impulsivity and hyperactive. These symptoms have been related with academic failure. Due to the impact that this deficit has on the education, it is important to recognize the condition in college students and give them the necessary help. We interviewed a group of teachers from different universities and colleges in Puerto Rico. It was observed that a substantial part of the teacher (more than 60%) interviewed had knowledge about the prevalence of the ADHD/ADD in the society (in children). It was established that most of the teachers don't know that the conditions persist during adulthood and adults can show symptoms of ADD/ADHD during adult hood.
The prevalence of refractive error and ocular disorders among infants and young children with severe behavioral problems and developmental disorders is not well defined, particularly in developing countries. We performed a retrospective review of ophthalmic examinations performed during a National Institutes of Health-funded cohort study of very young children in Peru with behavioral problems and at risk for developmental disorders. Two-hundred twenty-two children between the ages of 0 and 4 years (mean 2.2 +/- 0.9 years) were examined and 100 (45.0%) had an abnormal ocular exam. Overall, the prevalence of refractive error was 33.3%, nystagmus was 12.2%, and strabismus was 10.9%. Among children with Down syndrome, refractive error ranged from 46.2% at age 2 to 85.7% at age 4. Refractive error and ocular disorders are highly prevalent even at a young age in children with behavioral problems and developmental disorders. Much of the visual impairment in this population is treatable; early identification and intervention can have a lifelong positive impact on neurodevelopment.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide valuable instructional approaches to meet the different learning needs of boys and girls in reading. The effective literacy instructional approaches addressed here are the result of the strategic combination of relevant research contributions from diverse fields in education such as neuroscience, cognitive psychology and well-known literacy organizations. Neuroscience has shed light to understand how the brain learns so that we can develop teaching practices aligned to brain-based learning. Cognitive psychology allows us to explain gender differences that explain why boys and girls think, communicate, and behave differently. Significant studies completed by the Early Literacy Reading Panel, the National Research Council, and the National Reading Panel, inform us about the essential components of literacy instruction and when these should be taught. The compilation of these solid research-findings inform the how, why, what, and when of effective literacy instruction so that we can design early intervention programs and a variety of instructional approaches that can successfully address reading motivation and literacy achievement in boys and girls. Therefore, using this research-based information to teach today the readers of tomorrow certainly becomes an educational challenge.
The use of virtual reality games has spread to various human activities in populations of all ages. Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs), as well as virtual reality games, have become strategic allies in the learning processes, since interactivity increases motivation, a process that underlies learning. In the same sense, these games have been used as methods of cognitive and physics in some neurological pathologies such as cerebrovascular accidents and Alzheimer's disease. This research was developed through a quasi-experimental study with a pre-test, post-test and a control group with infants. The study population met the following inclusion criteria: children of educational institutions located in the city of Bogota, D.C., that have not practiced virtual reality sports games and that have all their physical and mental capacities, and whose parents signed the informed consent. In this study we found a slight increase in the number of students who moved to a higher stage in the jump pattern in the group that performed 2 weekly sessions of virtual reality games during one month (intervention group) with respect to the control group. This research initiates a way in which investigations can be carried out that can include larger sample sizes, with more objective tests for the evaluation of the locomotive pattern, an increase in the number of sessions of the video game, and statistical tests to determine the effects of the games of reality development of motor patterns
We present a theoretical review of notions of autonomy to show how they organize discourses within social sciences around the biological reality of ideal self-regulating individuals. First, we reconstruct key meanings of autonomy in biological theory, focusing on theories of autopoietic systems and their connections to constructivist epistemologies in the social sciences. Second, we discuss developmental and neuropsychological theories of self-regulation, demonstrating conceptual links with biological and systems theory. Third, we discuss the implications for education, using the case of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder as an example on how the construction of the biological, as the natural foundation of individuality, is intensified by the ideal integration of individuals as self-regulated agents. We argue that autonomy, theoretically rooted in modern philosophy, and expanded through system theory to biological and social sciences, has become a biopolitical project contributing to contemporary biological rationalities that produce the educated subject.
Fine motor development is generally defined by visual-manual skills, which allow children to perform basic tasks helping their independence and developing their self-esteem. When detecting weaknesses in the development of motor skills, children have to undergo a traditional physical therapy made up of a set of sessions where they perform exercises in order to improve the range of movement of certain regions of the body. However, this therapy can become repetitive and boring. Therefore, the patient's attention is not captured, which causes distractions and interruptions during the execution of the established exercises. This paper has as purpose to present a prototype of an immersive environment making use of augmented reality in order to support the development of fine motor therapy. For this is carried out the design of 3D scenarios based on the identification, description and analysis of traditional therapy, where it is interacted by means of a gestural control device such as a Leap Motion, in order to be able to manipulate environment's elements. Preliminary results have shown that, through the use of this type of scenarios, can obtained an increase in the disposition, attention, motivation and interest by the child when performing the fine motor therapeutic exercises, as support within a training scenario. Finally, conclusions and future works aimed at the development of therapy through immersive scenarios and non-invasive brain-computer interfaces are presented.
The purchase decision is affected by the stimuli and perceptions that consumers receive during the purchase ritual; with this objective, techniques such as Eye Tracking (ED have been developed to enhance the design of commercial spaces and the consumer experience to improve brand identity and loyalty. The application of Neuroscience (NSc) allows knowing with certainty the answers that the consumers have in front of the different stimuli that they perceive in the commercial environment. Improvement of the capabilities that the use of ET gives to the design, implies that this technology is involved in the training of young designers, allows a better control of the visual stimuli for the design of spaces; this implies the modification of traditional methods of design education. To illustrate the capabilities that ET brings to the training of designers and the transformation of the design process, a descriptive - qualitative research was developed, focused on the ethnographic aspects and the opinion of the consumers, as opposed to stimuli provided in establishments of alcoholics and sale of non-alcoholic drinks (pub). It was developed with a sample (n = 10), frequent assistants of the Pub (age range between 18 and 30 years). A series of 44 photographs representing the journey followed by those attending the Pub was presented to the exhibition; ET technology was used to identify which visual stimuli and which aspects of the different areas of the Pub concentrate the attention of consumers; the analysis allowed to identify the focal points of greater attention in the consumers and also those aspects of the space that do not generate interest. These results allow to adjust in the design of the space to improve the consumption experience, boosting the frequency of attendance to the Pub, product consumption and brand loyalty. Control of visual stimuli from the design of commercial space enables the designer to develop a better consumer experience, which achieve a higher perceptual acceptance and positioning in consumers, aspects that should be considered in the design process of commercial spaces because of the advantage it can represent in the market, boosting profits and brand loyalty.
Puerto Rico is in dire need of transforming its education system to counter the current economic recession and ensure a future with talented Puerto Ricans at the forefront of scientific research and technology development. Here we present a group of neuroscientists and educators, the NeuroBoricuas, committed to revolutionize the scientific culture of Puerto Rico by incorporating neuroscience research training and inquiry-based activities in public and private schools. We carry out our vision through diverse methods, such as community outreach activities, where we promote neuroscience literacy using diverse learning activities. In parallel, we are designing a neuroscience course and textbook with educators to be implemented in schools. We also established neuroscience laboratories in K-12 schools and trained science teachers to manage such laboratories, using equipment from the company Backyard Brains. These laboratory experiences are integrated into the academic curriculum in high schools and the equipment is also available for students interested in designing their independent research projects. Lastly, we are expanding a network of committed scientists who partner with educators to help nurture future neuroscientists early in their academic endeavors. Here, we describe our trajectory and our approach to transform scientific education in Puerto Rico.

In recent times, there has been a growing interest in neuroscience, mainly thanks to the important advances in neuroimaging techniques, which have made it possible to observe the functioning of the brain in real time. The information obtained with these new technologies is very useful for the teaching of different disciplines. However, the direct application of neuroscientific knowledge in the classroom has proven to be very difficult due to the lack of a common language between neuroscience and education. In practice, the vast majority of teachers lack training in neuroscience, which translates into a lack of knowledge about this discipline and poor ability to access scientific information about the brain. This situation has resulted in teachers interested in neuroscience having access to erroneous or pseudo-scientific knowledge promoted with commercial or sensationalist interests. Several investigations have reported this phenomenon and have revealed that teachers in different countries, including Chile, have a series of misconceptions or neuromyths about the brain and its functioning. The purpose of this paper is to to evaluate the origin of the most popular erroneous beliefs about the brain, as well as to the brain, as well as to deliver the neuroscience vision on the subject and to propose the the implementation of a new discipline: educational neuroscience.
This paper describes a case study of an educational experience oriented to evaluate how much the processes of educational learning are assimilated through the evaluation oriented to develop students' abilities and leadership skills. It was carried out at the School of Arts and Letters with a group of 30 students in the area of research methodology and the specialization in Illustration; the main purpose was to develop new abilities, skills, attitudes and competencies in the acquisition of social, cognitive and emotional intelligence tools and strategies. Thus, since students' difficulties to interact in social environments, to have empathic recognition with others, to read and interpret appropriately the emotional signals in their peers, and to manifest their capacities of emotional interaction, it is observed that the main behavior and conduct is lack of discipline habits, study, and resilience capacity. Through the strategies of NLP (Neurolinguistic Programming), the level of in-room learning values of ethics, behavior, linking and incorporating positive habits into the social fabric of the community and to its learning processes is evaluated. This activity is described through a case study, focused on the analysis of the evaluation from the reflection of a group of students who experienced the strategies of neurolinguistic programming guided by teachers, authors of the present work. Among the most relevant characteristics, we have the following: 1)The NLP has evolved as an innovative educational technology, which enables people to organize information and perceptions in a way that allows them to achieve results that help improve student's social and cognitive skills and competences. 2) It is based on a methodology under the operative assumption that each and every behavior has a structure that has been possible to model and reprogram, thus observing an improvement of students' perceptual skills and ability for argumentation and reasoning. 3) Improving attitudes characterized by a conceptual appropriation in the sense of valuing the characteristics of curiosity, sense of awe, and desire to learn. These are skills that enable them to find new forms of communication and help them, from the acquisition of emotional intelligence skills, to interact actively with peers. For this case study, two key elements were considered in the evaluation process: The assessment technologies and the reflective approach of educational practice. They are linked to the educational practice reflection dimensioning the motivational, technical, environmental, and adaptation elements that are appropriate for the development of open curricula in the classroom. The study was carried out with the voluntary participation of the group of students through the direction and management of two curricula of academic programs in the University Institution, School of Arts and Letters.
In this paper, we introduce a performance-based test for measuring adolescents' competences in online inquiry. The test covers four competence dimensions: (1) searching and selecting relevant sources, (2) identifying the main ideas presented in the sources, (3) evaluating the credibility of the sources, and (4) synthesizing information across the sources. We implement a technological solution called NEURONE to carry out this routine. The scoring of the test data is demonstrated by presenting preliminary results of a case study. Finally, we discuss the strengths and limitations of the test.
For the past 30 years, research on the amygdala has largely focused on the genesis of defensive behaviors as its main function. This focus originated from early lesion studies and was supported by extensive anatomical, physiological, and pharmacological data. Here we argue that while much data is consistent with the fear model of amygdala function, it has never been directly tested, in part due to overreliance on the fear conditioning task. In support of the fear model, amygdala neurons appear to signal threats and/or stimuli predictive of threats. However, recent studies in a natural threat setting show that amygdala activity does not correlate with threats, but simply with the movement of the rat, independent of valence. This was true for both natural threats as well as conditioned stimuli; indeed there was no evidence of threat signaling in amygdala neurons. Similar findings are emerging for prefrontal neurons that modulate the amygdala. These recent developments lead us to propose a new conceptualization of amygdala function whereby the amygdala inhibits behavioral engagement. Moreover, we propose that the goal of understanding the amygdala will be best served by shifting away from fear conditioning toward naturalistic approach and avoidance paradigms that involve decision-making and a larger repertoire of spontaneous and learned behaviors, all the while keeping an open mind.
Henneman's Law (also known as size principle) states that, considering that motor neuron's size determines its excitation threshold, during the application of a muscular force the smaller motor units are the first to be recruited, and if the effort is stronger, the other motor units are going to be recruited in a stereotyped way, according to their progressive size. However, during daily living or sport activities, this principle has a number of exemptions. The purpose of this review is to describe, according to the scientific evidence, the conditions under which this principle does not apply or is significantly affected.
The universities, having gone through an unprecedented development in terms of number and coverage in the second half of the past century, are now confronted with new social and technological phenomena linked to globalization, which obliges them to radically reinvent themselves under penalty of being relegated in the competitive world of supply of education. Phenomena such as relocation of their users, advances in learning neurosciences, competition in terms of teacher quality, educational and virtual media development, and transnational market of educational supply, among others, will test the university's capacity to create and integrate new ways to develop its essential duties of teaching, researching and continuing education. On the basis of the Black swan theory developed by Nassim Taleb, this article presents some cultural and institutional pedagogy elements that might help universities to respond to the new conditions under which they will have to operate in a globalized world.
According to the dual systems model of adolescent risk taking, sensation seeking and impulse control follow different developmental trajectories across adolescence and are governed by two different brain systems. The authors tested whether different underlying processes also drive age differences in reward approach and cost avoidance. Using a modified Iowa Gambling Task in a multinational, cross-sectional sample of 3,234 adolescents (ages 9-17; M=12.87, SD=2.36), pubertal maturation, but not age, predicted reward approach, mediated through higher sensation seeking. In contrast, age, but not pubertal maturation, predicted increased cost avoidance, mediated through greater impulse control. These findings add to evidence that adolescent behavior is best understood as the product of two interacting, but independently developing, brain systems.
Introduction: In Colombia, the educational context demonstrates the need to implement new pedagogic strategies that allow favoring the learning and the formative development of the children. In this sense, the neuroscience in the education emerges as a strategy to transform the processes of education and learning as indispensable element into the integral formation of the human being. Objective: Generate the development of the logical mathematical thought activities of papiroflexia in 10 years old children, from the processes of learning across neuroscience. Theoretical Framework: Neuroscience as a discipline is interested to study the nervous system related to learning and education. At the same time, neuroscience incorporates different areas of knowledge and worries about for approaching the cognitive processes that make possible the exchange of the sensory information with the context and generates the knowledge from the limbic system learning. In this way, from the simplest to the most complex experience, changes occur in the nervous system, through cerebral neuroplasticity. Methodology: Qualitative study. Sample: children aged 10 years old, from three educational institutions of the city in Bogota, Colombia. Instruments: guide for the elaboration of the figure in papiroflexia, from the steps of the neuroscience: Perception - with the instructions of the elaboration of the game in papiroflexia; Comprehension - of the development of the game and his respective analysis by part of the children in this occasion across the basic mathematical operations (sum, subtraction, multiplication and division); Signification - includes the systematizing of the experience from the children and the establishment of associations realized by them, to identify the learn. Procedures: from the conformation of workgroups there is realized the explanation and elaboration of the game in papiroflexia; the results were analyzed by means of a table of auto evaluation, is contemplated the formative competences (social, cognitive and psychomotor) in the learning process. Results: 1. Formative competences: a) social: higher interaction between the participants, collaborative work and assertive dialog; b) cognitive: development of the logical mathematical thought, instructional monitoring, executive functions and metacognitive processes; c) psychomotor: precision, dexterity and visiomanual patterns. 2. From the steps of neuroscience: a) perception: the acquisition of information from the senses occurred when establishing a relationship with the context; b) comprehension: there was associated the first step in the appropriation of the figure in papiroflexia and the application of the same one in the basic mathematical operations during the game; and c) signification: it was identified at the time that the children managed to associate the papiroflexia with other experiences and other areas of knowledge. Conclusions: Neuroscience as a strategy of education and learning, seeks to establish the relation between the mental model of logical thinking and the processes of knowledge consolidation. Based on the need of teachers in the colombian educational context to favor logical mathematical learning, a search for pedagogical strategies is required to integrate theoretical knowledge with teaching practice. At the same time, there is highlighted the importance of involving the motivational component as a key to motivate the interest of the children in the classrooms.

The objective of the study is to determine the relationship between the teaching styles, types of personality and temperament of teachers of higher education. A preliminary document was taken from the study Relationship between teaching styles and levels of reading comprehension(Pastor, 2008). The methodology corresponds to non-experimental, descriptive correlational type research. The study population consisted of 50 teachers selected with a sampling non-probability by quotas (De Canales, 1986). The teachers that participated completed a questionnaire from the teaching styles of Anthony F. Grasha, comprising expert, formal authority, personal model, and facilitator and delegator styles and completed a questionnaire rating personalities by J. Eysenck-S. B. G., which assesses the dimensions of personality introversion, extroversion, psychoticism, and neuroticism. The results indicated a significant relationship between different styles of teaching and extroverted personality, and concluded that the more extrovert the teacher is, the more they will tend to apply a more delegatory style of teaching.
The article analyzes the importance of early care in child development, guiding a neuropsychological perspective of development. The early care model seeks to refer to the set of interventions aimed at children and their work in conjunction with a multidisciplinary team. It presents recommendations for the implementation of programs that allow early intervention in the early years, so that the process of care for the affected children can be optimized by the different early developmental and learning alterations.
Background: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome hypermobility type, also known as Joint Hypermobility Syndrome (EDS-HT/JES), is the most common hereditary disorder of the connective tissue (HDCT). It is characterized by tissue fragility, joint hypermobility and a wide range of articular and non-articular manifestations, which often appear in infancy. The clinical picture of EDS-HT/JHS is poorly known by the medical community, as is the presence of ESSENCE (Early Symptomatic Syndromes Eliciting Neurodevelopmental Clinical Examinations) problems in affected children. Aim: The present work reviews the clinical and empirical evidence for ESSENCE difficulties in children with EDS-HT/1E1S. Method: A narrative review of the literature was undertaken following a comprehensive search of scientific online databases and reference lists. This included publications of quantitative and qualitative research. Results: Motor abnormality, hyperactivity/hypoactivity, inattention, speech/language, social interaction, behavioral, sleep, feeding and emotional problems are ESSENCE difficulties for which there is some evidence of an association with EDS-HT/JHS. Conclusion: Children with EDS-HT/JHS present ESSENCE problems that often coexist and tend to be recognized before the HDCT. Clinicians encountering children with ESSENCE problems should consider the possibility of an underlying HDCT such as EDS-HT/JHS, probably influencing neurodevelopmental attributes in a subgroup of children. Awareness of these interconnected clinical problems might help improve early referral, diagnosis and treatment of EDS-HT/JHS. (C) 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The relationship between early adversity and numerous negative outcomes across the lifespan is evident in a wide range of societies and cultures (e.g., Pakulak, Stevens,& Neville, 2018). Among themost affected neural systems are those supporting attention, self-regulation, and stress regulation. As such, these systems represent targets for neurobiologically informed interventions addressing early adversity. In prior work with monolingual native English-speaking families, we showed that a two-generation intervention targeting these systems in families improves outcomes across multiple domains including child brain function for selective attention (for detail, see Neville et al., 2013). Here, we discuss the translation and cultural adaptation (CA) of this intervention in local and international contexts, which required systematic consideration of cultural differences that could affect program acceptability. First, we conducted a translation and CA of our program to serve Latino families in the United States using the Cultural Adaptation Process (CAP), a model that works closely with stake-holders in a systematic, iterative process. Second, to implement the adapted program in Medellin, Colombia, we conducted a subsequent adaptation for Colombian culture using the same CAP. Our experience underscores the importance of consideration of cultural differences and a systematic approach to adaptation before assessing the efficacy of neurobiologically informed interventions in different cultural contexts. (c) 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Introduction. This study aims at analyzing whether EFs may predict the SP of children from different low socioeconomic strata, having controlled the effects of age and socioeconomic status (SES). Method. The sample included 178 Argentine children of both genders (52% boys), between 6 and 10 years of age, belonging to the upper-low SES (41%), lower-low SES (39%) and marginal SES (20%). The children were evaluated by means of a battery of neuropsychological EF and school achievement tests. Results. The proposed model accounted for 69% of the SP of the children. EFs were the most significant direct predictor and, in addition, mediated the relationship between SES and SP. Conclusion. In line with previous findings, these results indicate that the impoverishment of family material and sociocultural conditions is associated with a lower EF performance among children, which negatively impacts their SP.
Background: Teachers' conceptions and misconceptions about neuroscience are crucial in establishing a proper dialogue between neuroscience and education. In recent years, studies in different countries have examined primary and secondary school teachers' conceptions. However, although preschool education has proved its importance to later academic outcomes, there is limited investigation of neuroscience conceptions focused exclusively on preschool teachers.Purpose: The present study sought to explore preschool teachers' conceptions and misconceptions about neuroscience in an Argentine setting.Sample, design and methods: We used quantitative and qualitative approaches to explore concepts about neuroscience, including specific neuromyths. Data were collected using a 24-statement questionnaire and 5 in-depth interviews. The survey was administered to 204 teachers of children between the ages of 0-5-years in Argentina.Results and conclusions: Results from this exploratory study suggested a relatively high level of general knowledge of neuroscience amongst the preschool teachers in the study. However, three particular issues seemed unclear for teachers: memory, plasticity and the myth that we only use 10% of the brain'. Specifically, memory' was understood as learning by heart'; neural underpinnings of memory and plasticity processes were unknown; and the myth that we only use 10% of the brain was used to explain individual differences in intelligence in a straightforward way. In addition, anecdotal evidence was used by teachers to justify their conceptions about neuroscience. Finally, the wider implications of these results for bridging neuroscience and education are discussed.
A EducacAo Fisica Adaptada (EFA) e um campo de estudos recente no Brasil, que cria interfaces com outras areas. Uma delas situa-se no campo da saude mental, nos atendimentos com criancas e adolescentes que apresentam autismo, psicose e neurose grave e sAo atendidos nos Centros de AtencAo Psicossocial Infanto-juvenil (CAPSi). O objetivo desse estudo foi investigar a representacAo da EFA no imaginario dos profissionais de saude que trabalham nesses Centros situados no Estado do Rio de Janeiro. Adotou-se a pesquisa qualitativa, com a analise do discurso e o referencial teorico baseou-se no campo do imaginario social. Os resultados mostraram que o profissional de EducacAo Fisica na area da saude mental situa-se no lugar social da contingencia, que se opoe ao necessario. Emerge a crenca de que este profissional e para quem tem saude e nAo para trabalhar na saude, nAo considerando a EFA uma pratica terapeutica.
In this article the results of the comparative analysis of three studies are discussed: The Science of Art: A Neurological Theory of Aesthetic Experience (1999) Neural Correlates of Beauty (2004) and Neurocinematics: the Neuroscience of Film (2008). Each of the aforementioned research examines the neuronal activity of a group participants observed photographs, paintings or films. It was considered that the exposed experiences allow understanding the scope and purpose of neurocinema. The method of investigation was to review and analytical approach. Tables were designed to systematize the revision of the texts and descriptive tables based on abstracting RAE were developed. It is concluded that two of the studies had in common that participants showed neuronal activity in the area of the limbic system, the brain region that processes emotions.
This paper reveals the results of the pre-test phase of the implementation of a neuropedagogical tool-based strategy aimed at strengthening problem solution skills in mathematics (trigonometric functions), specifically in the methodological process. The methodology applied to this investigation is mixed with a pre-experimental design, based on the initial data provided by internal and external tests provided by the institution and the professors, as well as information acquired through an instrument designed in light of neuropedagogy. Conclusions: Including neuropedagogy-centered strategies makes it possible to visualize aspects to enhance the students' skills from a creative, emotional, operational and practical point of view.
The introduction of neuroscience must be considered in all modalities of education. Among such, in the Distance Education that has been the focus of this study whose purpose was to verify if the developed pedagogical actions in the Virtual Learning Environments of technical courses of Rede e-Tec Brasil of Federal Center of Technological Education of Minas Gerais (Rede e-Tec Brasil do CEFET-MG) use the principles of neuroscience in the learning process from of perspective of teachers and tutors away. It was decided this study by scientific research qualitative, descriptive and exploratory. About technical procedures, the choice was the case study. Results show that in the technical courses of Rede e-Tec Brasil a distancia do CEFET-MG, the developed pedagogical actions do not use all principles of neuroscience in the learning teaching process yet although it isn't because there isn't enough technology, but because exist lack of perception of teachers and tutors of distance on knowing their students and their differences.
The present study aims to validate the reading test ABCDeti in Colombian schoolchildren. Two-hundred sixty-five children, aged 5 to 8 years old, between the grades of transition and second grade, all residents of Cali (Colombia), were assessed with two reading tests, ABCDeti and the dimensions of Habilidades metalinguisticas and Lectura from the neuropsyhological battery Evaluacion Neuropsicologica Infantil. Results showed that ABCDeti has an internal consistency, calculated for each school grade, ranged between.68 and.74. On the other hand, convergent validity was alpha=.68 to .79. on each school grade. Factor analysis, performed by school grade, explained between 45% y 54% of the data variance. Briefly, the results of the present study suggest that ABCDeti is a valid test to assess initial reading skills in Colombian schoolchildren.
The following article presents a series of investigations, reflections, and quotes about neuroscience, education, and psychology. Each area is specialized in some matters but at some point they share territory and mutually benefit one another, and help us to increasingly understand the complex world of learning, the brain, and human behavior. We hope them to be of interest and a promoter of new thoughts.
The aim of this descriptive study is to determine the characteristics of reading and writing errors of Colombian children who are in second grade and who don't present neuropsychological issues. To achieve this goal, 61 children aged between 7 and 9 years old were divided in two groups, the first group was formed by students with high or superior achievement in Spanish, and other was formed by those with basic or lower achievement in Spanish. Results allowed to identify and compare errors and grammatical categories used from both groups. Differences and similarities were found in both groups such as the following mistakes: omission, substitutions, additions, translocations, orthographic mistakes, mirror-writing, word joining and segmentation. We concluded that omission and addition are the most common errors. Also, it was found that the occurrence of errors in reading assignments is less common in children with high achievement, presenting better precision, and therefore a greater generalization of phonological structure of words. However, a greater number of errors were found in writing tasks with these children due to the larger quantity of written words.
Objectives: Over the years, the concept of autism has undergone several changes; discussing autism means facing a range of diagnostic possibilities. One of the areas in which it is believed that there is overlap is between children with disorders of the autism spectrum and children with specific language impairments. This study presents a group of 131 patients who came to child neurology consultation visits. They showed a particular linguistic phenotype, characterised by vocabulary and prosody that made their speech sound foreign. Results: Sixty four percent of all children, who were detected with prosody disorders and unusual language phenotype in the first visit, also had important associated disorders in socialization and the development of play. These disorders were significant enough to be considered a pervasive developmental disorder (PDD) or within the extended spectrum of PDD. In the group of children who were followed for six to 24 months, as well as in the group with a two to 10 year follow-up, sixty nine percent showed clinical characteristics within PDD or the extended spectrum of PDD at the last consultation visit. The diagnosis remained stable over the years. Conclusion: It appears there is a strong correlation between these prosody disorders and unusual language phenotype and the presence of clinical characteristics within PDD or the extended spectrumof PDD. I suggest taking into account this particular linguistic phenotype in order to intervene significantly at an early stage.
Autism Spectrum Disorder is the name of a group of neurodevelopmental disorders which affect social skills that should be developed at an early age. For this reason, they may hinder the development of other basic skills such as the cognitive ones related to logical and mathematical thinking. The development of these skills is a primary goal for special education initiatives on a permanent basis as they allow the acquisition of knowledge that is used in everyday life. These skills may also facilitate social inclusion and a future insertion in the labor market. In Chile there are no Learning Objects available that potentiate the development of mathematical skills in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder. For this reason, a Learning Object for multi-touch devices was developed in order to support therapeutic and co-therapeutic initiatives for the development of math skills in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder. The Learning Object is currently available at Google Play and had more than 15,000 downloads.
Introduction: Children's comprehensive development comprises entertainment environments as a way of transforming interpersonal, family, and social relations as a benefit for themselves. In such way and in the early childhood education, games establishes a pedagogical tool for physical education, which strengthens the psychosocial development and the construction of the human knowledge. Objectives: I. to identify games as a part of the children is growing and evolution in their mental and affective development processes. II. To establish the way in which physical education leans towards the improvement of children's personal, social and ethical development in the early childhood education. Theoretical Framework: Games are the first space in which children learn to establish relationships with their environment and allows them to deal with their own age problems. Cognitive aspects, including perception, memory, language, and everything related to the motor and physical processes become vital in the proper growing of a child. The fact that a child can have an appropriate development of social skills to relate to others, express his feelings and needs, and confront diverse contexts as an interchange mediated by language and playing favours the creation of autonomy and confidence themselves. Therefore, the neuroscientific theory applied to physical education promotes an educational and pedagogical option in the personal development, which involves the interpretation, classification and organization of knowledge on the part of children. Methodology: Participants Children between the ages of four and six. Instruments -Workshop guide in which students will find the instructions of a traditional games, it is divided in three stages: a) perception and apprehension (with instructions of how to play the game); b) comprehension and explanation (of the development of the game and its analysis by children); and c) signification and modelling (it includes the systematization of the children's experience and setting up of associations made by them to identify what has been learnt). Procedure: This work begins in the classroom when the game explained, then the implementation of the game done outdoors and finally; it closes up inside the classroom to recollect the meanings and associations made by children during the playing of the game. Expected Results: It is expected that: a) from the educational activities integrated with the physical education and particularly with the use of typical and traditional games, the perception of the child can be stimulated to generate in his mind the ideas and imagination to understand and transform those perceptions into knowledge; b) the pedagogical tools used in physical education to play the game and demonstrate their psychosocial character as regulating elements of teaching and learning. Conclusion: Physical education directly related to the personal development of children that try to take part in it, by means of recreational activities and everyday actions, not only facilitating the development of the body and motor abilities but also, contributing with the proper ways to relate to others in the different sociocultural spaces in which a child participates.
This study analyzes cognitive and emotional empathy in students who started their training at the Education Science Faculty of the Pedagogical and Technological University of Colombia. The sample was formed by 317 students enrolled in the study programs of Preschool, Plastic Arts, Natural Sciences, Physical Education, Philosophy, Computer Science, Foreign Languages, Mathematics, Music, Psychopedagogy, and Social Sciences. The Cognitive and Affective Empathy Scale (TECA for its Spanish initials) was used to collect data. Both the reliability of TECA and its construct validity were determined for this sample. Participants obtained better results in the cognitive dimension, the highest scores additionally corresponding to the emotional understanding scale. As far as gender is concerned, women outperformed men in their scores, especially in the two affective dimension scales. Differences also appeared according to age, scores growing as age increased. With regard to the training program in which students were enrolled, significant contrasts were identified in perspective adoption and empathic stress. Finally, a suggestion is made about the need for teacher training curricula to envisage empathy development for the purpose of strengthening the emotional skills of future lecturers.
Early life events can exert a powerful influence on both the pattern of brain architecture and behavioral development. The paper examines the nature of nervous system plasticity, the nature of functional connectivities in the nervous system, and the application of connectography to better understand the concept of a functional neurology that can shed light on approaches to instruction in preschool and primary education. The paper also examines the genetic underpinnings of brain development such as synaptogenesis, plasticity, and critical periods as they relate to numerosity, language and perceptual development. Discussed is how the child's environment in school and home interact with and modify the structures and functions of the developing brain. The role of experience for the child is to both maintain and expand the child's early wiring diagram necessary for effective cognitive as well as neurological development beyond early childhood. (C) 2015 Colegio Oficial de Psicologos de Madrid. Published by Elsevier Espafia, S.L.U. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license.
Neuroscientific study on child poverty carried out by several research groups over the last two decades has allowed us to gather evidence showing that the impact of material and symbolic needs from poverty, may from the onset limit opportunities of development and social inclusion of people throughout their life cycle. Nevertheless, the potential shift inherent to neural plasticity, individual differences, and the potential change of self-regulatory development by means of environment intervention (i.e., family, school, and community) also show that impacts are not the same for every child, that there is no critical period for cognitive development and learning competencies that is limited to the first 1,000 days, that irreversibility of poverty impact is not a fact that affects every child exposed to it, and that poverty does not necessary means developmental deficit.(C) 2015 Colegio Oficial de Psicologos de Madrid. Published by Elsevier Espaiia, S.L.U. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license.
The aim of this paper is to contribute to the articulation of the concepts of cognition and life in educational practice, through the concept of experience. The theoretical corpus includes philosophical, psychological, biological, physical and neuroscientific basis, until rooting it in the concrete practice. Our ontoepistemological perspective is based on doing historical tour about the split of the concepts of doxa and episteme in the field of philosophy. Subsequently, it was developed the concept of experience. The relevance of this development is showed, as well as its scientific underpinnins, to propose an educational biocentric perspective, where the integration between knowledge and life is recovered. Finally it is presented the research results, from the setting in motion of this approach.
Neuroscientific knowledge has undeniably gained interest among educators worldwide. However, not all brain facts believed by teachers are supported by science. This study sought to evaluate the belief in these so-called neuromyths among 3,451 Latin American teachers. We found that, consistent with prior research among teachers in other geographic areas, teachers in Latin America hold major misconceptions about neuroscience, especially as it relates to factual information about its structure and functioning. Differences across South American nations were observed with moderate and slight effect sizes for general knowledge of the brain and neuromyths, respectively. Teachers working in higher education had slightly superior performance. Teachers at all levels who reported knowing more about the brain, however, were more likely to believe invalid assertions known as neuromyths. These results shed light on trends in the field of education, hoping to encourage the development of strategies aimed at correcting the use of science as it relates to education. The implications regarding teaching practice, policy, and teacher training are discussed.
In this review information is obtained about the use of laughter and humor in the teaching-learning process of students in the classroom context and under the focus of neuroscience. Ideas about laughter and humor are defined; neurophysiological explanations are given, the main theories are identified and finally, research on the use of laughter and humor in the classroom are reviewed. Also included reflections that attribute a positive influence to the use of humor in teaching-learning process, because its emotional, social and cognitive aspects are transformed. However, it is concluded that the insertion of laughter and humor in the classroom requires empirical studies departing from an neuropedagogico approach, because these analysis enriched by neuroscience give to professors confidence in its benefits for teaching and learning.
Firstly, this paper surveys the most recent scientific production about Executive Functions. Secondly, it reflects on its use into everyday teaching practices in educative institutions. For this, we analyze the theoretical developments made by neuropsychology, rehabilitation treatments and stimulation in school and clinical contexts of diverse countries. The development of Executive Functions should be considered one of the main goals of formal mandatory education since it has the responsibility of providing an integral formation of all members from society and giving the knowledge and skills for the full involvement of citizens.
Aims: evaluate the effectiveness of the passes, decision-making in the offensive phase and some cognitive components such as attention, inhibitory control and memory in Ultimate Frisbee youth athletes, for the purpose of establishing their behavior and the relationship that occurs between them. Method: descriptive and correlative research, conducted with 19 adolescents, men, players participating in the program INDER Medellin. A test was used to assess the effectiveness of forehand and backhand passes, other for evaluating the decision taking in competition and simulated situations and finally the Neurorg (R) system was used to assess cognitive components. Results: results showed a good to excellent level in the effectiveness of the passes and decision making. In attention and memory found an average level, however in inhibitory control a low rating was found. Only was found a direct relationship between the effectiveness of the passes and the decisions taking of the players. With respect to the inverse relationships was not found a significant relationship between decision making and cognitive components, as neither was found a significant relationship between the effectiveness of the passes and cognitive components. Conclussions: Cognitive performance of players in memory, attention and inhibitory control is not related to the good performance in the game.
In the present work our objective is to develop a contribution to the education of university undergraduates in Educational Sciences on Neurosciences that counts for the development of competences and performance in heterogeneous classrooms. We define foundational aspects of what we call Neuroscience of and with Education, and we remark the difference between this one and any intention of applicability of Neurosciences to Education. We consider that only an integrative perspective will give rise to university graduates in Educational Sciences who are able to develop professional competences with the cognitive flexibility and Aristotelian phronesis that the contemporaneous society requires, acting as teachers, researchers and, in occasions, also extensionists.
Recent developments in neuroscience have generated great expectations in the education world globally. However, building a bridge between brain science and education has been hard. Educational researchers and practitioners more often than not hold unrealistic images of neuroscience, some naively positive and others blindly negative. Neuroscientist looking at how the brain reacts and changes during mental tasks involving reading or mathematics usually discuss education as some constant and undifferentiated social environment of the brain, either assuming it to be a black box or evoking an image of perfect schooling and full access to it. In this review, we claim that a more productive and realistic relationship between neuroscience and the comparative study of education can be thought about in terms of the hypothesis that formal education is having a significant role in the cognitive and neurological development of human populations around the world. We review research that supports this hypothesis and implications for future studies.
The aim of this paper is to analyze the educational practices in relation to the health of the indigenous people from Misak, in Colombia. An investigation into the educational project is being carried out from several fields using qualitative methodology, specifically the hermeneutical method, given the characteristics of the study. The framework of the educational project draws from the rights of indigenous people subject to the 1991 Constitution, to International Rights, and to the 2007 Public Policies. The specific purposes of the project are strengthening physical and evolutionary development of Misak's children by adding psycho-objetual and neurolinguistic processes, as well as social relations based on initial own education in accordance with the community itself. Throughout this essay, we develop cultural policies and measures on ethno-education and interculturality. (C) 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).
This text introduces the Based partially on the Torrance model to describe creativity and his approach to its evaluation a research oriented to evaluate creative performance and functional brain activation was run in Argentina. The study was co-leaded by a neurologist and a music educator, involving multidisciplinary teams. A tool developed and validated in a previous work (S.C.A.M.P.E.R) has been applied to assess creative performance in a group of 24 voluntary students from a university grade Music Therapy career. A functional magnetic resonance imaging paradigm, involving simple audible rhythmical stimuli and collection of subject responses to creation and repetition tasks, was designed and then implemented. Our results suggested that subjects with better performances on fluidity and flexibility assessments showed in both cerebral hemispheres active brain areas associated to cognitive, emotional and perceptual processes whereas subjects with poorer performances activated brain areas mostly related with complex sensorimotor integration, predominantly unilaterally.
Reflect on the concept of creativity and arts learning leads us to think of the psychological processes and intersubjective constructions in the social order in which we find ourselves that are considered creative. But we should question what we call creativity, what are the factors that are delimited as aspects or properties of the creative person, or if we consider the process of building or innovation and finally if we evaluate the product as work of art. We then opened, a number of questions that can be addressed from different perspectives and have been worked from very different fields. From neuroscience research, processes and psychological mechanisms involved, to semiotic analysis of works of art, finding certain epistemological obstacles Bacherlad to say, we should locate to account for what we mean by creativity. Also we propose a critical analysis from the joint between the investigation of subjects from a neurophysiological research line and tell if the emerging results correlate with the mechanisms and processes that unfold in the teaching-learning processes.
The present study shows the results of a research experience developed during the years 2011 and 2012 in the grades of pre-kindergarten and kindergarten in two private schools of Barranquilla. Its principal objective was to develop expertise in the design and implementation of activities for stimulating phonological awareness skills. The project was carried out with nine preschool teachers. These teachers were applied a survey and they were also interviewed and their classes were observed. Class activities were designed by particpants and investigators. This project allowed participants to deepen the conceptual references that support the theoretical and practical work with children to structure a working model for prekindergarten teachers and kindergarten from the affective, cognitive, sensory, motor and language skills, and propose relevant activities for each skill and voiced segment of speech. This work allowed a final proposal which could specify the number of sessions, time per activity and number of repetitions has to face each child to achieve and maintain the ability for sound segment.
There is big consensus that computer games may be an effective way of learning and many initiatives are being developed where aspects from cognitive sciences are being applied in the development of these games. In this article, we present Mate Marote, a flexible framework for large-scale educational interventions. Based on the delivery programs of computers to each student in Argentinian schools, we developed an environment that provides activities/games and registers usage statistics. This framework keeps installation up-to-date connecting with a central server as Internet connection is detected, synchronizing new activities, version updates and usage history. As a first testbed intervention, we deployed three games in La Rioja province (Argentina), where OLPC is the official program. These games were focused on training inhibitory control, working memory and planning skills. We found that usage statistics of games replicate previous results found at the laboratory, showing that this platform works as an intervention framework despite its unsupervised nature. (C) 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Knowing how students learn best, can find ways to facilitate learning, to learn more effectively. The cognitive, affective and physiological features have to see how students form concepts, and select means of representation. The learning style is dominant defines the best way for a person to retain new information, filtering what is to be learned. Perhaps the predominant style task is not the same for the other predominant, or perhaps could be a combination of them So we should be asking how we offer classes to students of Engineering, to further them in learning. This paper pretends through the test of neurolinguistic programming, to determine what learning style they find most convenient for receiving the content better. The development was carried out with students of Chemical Engineering in Materials, Electronics, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of La Plata.
Pedagogy is the science and art of teaching. Each generation needs to explore the history, theory, and practice of the teacher-student interaction. Here we pave the path to develop a science that explores the cognitive and physiological processes involved in the human capacity to communicate knowledge through teaching. We review examples from our previous work in this research area and discuss a path to reveal the cognitive and cerebral mechanisms by which we teach, unfolding a complex operation such as teaching in its constituents and components.
In the beginning of the 21st century, creativity has been highly esteemed not only in the arts and sciences, but also in economy, politics, and individual welfare. Most theories and practical applications stem from individual sciences and frequently conclude with generalizations that cannot be derived from the specific scientific paradigm. It seems necessary to mark the limitations of individual scientific approaches and to detect where interdisciplinary perspectives are indispensable. This article is an attempt to investigate the interdependence and complementarity of neurobiological, psychological, and socio-cultural, as well as practical, aspects of creativity. It is shown that creativity is often a dialectical process apparent in psychological, cultural, and even neurobiological research. The dialectic of order and chaos seems to be a general concept that is conceived differently by the individual sciences and transports different meaning. However, it is shown that different scientific concepts also contain corresponding and complementary knowledge which amplifies scientific perspectives through interdisciplinary interpretation. The dialectics between coherence-incoherence, stabilization-destabilization, construction-deconstruction of cognitions, emotions, and actions are shown to be corresponding and complementary principles. The interdisciplinary interpretation of the findings of individual sciences leads to practical implications.
Traditionally, emotions have played a very discreet role in the school and affectivity in the classroom has been lacking in the relationships of teachers and students. With all of the above, since Mayer & Salovey (1990) first coined the term Emotional Intelligence (EI) in an academic journal, the number of researches and findings regarding the relationship of EI with different behaviors, with life success and academic achievement among others, have led to important progress, allowing repositioning of emotional management programs in educational institutions. It should be noted that various disciplines such as Psychology, Affective Neuroscience, Buddhism and Education, have given prominence to emotions and their impact on social and human development. For this reason we can identify several successful experiences suggesting a focus for the development of emotional skills in teachers 'trainee.
This research sought to contribute to the knowledge of the differences in the level of development of neuropsychological factors and cognitive processes in children with and without writing difficulties. Similarly, we wanted to see if there was an association between neuropsychological factors and processes involved in writing. Descriptive design was causal comparative, examining 80 children in third through sixth grade, studying in state schools of Callao using EPRE Test (Velarde, Canales, Melendez & Lingan, 2014), Child Neuropsychological Diagnostic Test Luria-DNI Test and Wechsler intelligence: WISC-IV. The results showed significant differences in all neuropsychological factors favoring the group without writing difficulties. Also, no relationship between most neuropsychological factors and psychological processes involved in writing. The instruments demonstrated their validity and usefulness.
Background: We present a software tool called SENB, which allows the geometric and biophysical neuronal properties in a simple computational model of a Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) axon to be changed. The aim of this work is to develop a didactic and easy-to-use computational tool in the NEURON simulation environment, which allows graphical visualization of both the passive and active conduction parameters and the geometric characteristics of a cylindrical axon with HH properties. Results: The SENB software offers several advantages for teaching and learning electrophysiology. First, SENB offers ease and flexibility in determining the number of stimuli. Second, SENB allows immediate and simultaneous visualization, in the same window and time frame, of the evolution of the electrophysiological variables. Third, SENB calculates parameters such as time and space constants, stimuli frequency, cellular area and volume, sodium and potassium equilibrium potentials, and propagation velocity of the action potentials. Furthermore, it allows the user to see all this information immediately in the main window. Finally, with just one click SENB can save an image of the main window as evidence. Conclusions: The SENB software is didactic and versatile, and can be used to improve and facilitate the teaching and learning of the underlying mechanisms in the electrical activity of an axon using the biophysical properties of the squid giant axon.
Schizophrenia and high functioning autism-spectrum disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopmental conditions that mainly impair social competence, while general intelligence (IQ) is spared. Both disorders have a strong ancillary role in theoretical research on social cognition. Recently the debate has started to be inflected by embodied and phenomenological approaches, which claim that the standard portrayal of all social understanding as so-called 'mindreading', i.e. the attribution of mental states to others in the service of explaining and predicting their behavior, is misguided. Instead it is emphasized that we normally perceive others directly as conscious and goal-directed persons, without requiring any theorizing and/or simulation. This paper evaluates some of the implications of abnormal experiences reported by people with schizophrenia and ASD for the current debate in cognitive science. For these people the practice of explicit mindreading seems to be a compensatory strategy that ultimately fails to compensate for - and may even exacerbate - their impairment of intuitive and interactive social understanding. Phenomenological psychopathology thereby supports the emerging view that 'mindreading' is not the principal form of normal social understanding. (C) 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Puglisi JL, Negroni JA, Chen-Izu Y, Bers DM. The force-frequency relationship: insights from mathematical modeling. Adv Physiol Educ 37: 28-34, 2013; doi:10.1152/advan.00072.2011.-The force-frequency relationship has intrigued researchers since its discovery by Bowditch in 1871. Many attempts have been made to construct mathematical descriptions of this phenomenon, beginning with the simple formulation of Koch-Wesser and Blinks in 1963 to the most sophisticated ones of today. This property of cardiac muscle is amplified by beta-adrenergic stimulation, and, in a coordinated way, the neurohumoral state alters both frequency (acting on the sinoatrial node) as well as force generation (modifying ventricular myocytes). This synchronized tuning is needed to meet new metabolic demands. Cardiac modelers have already linked mechanical and electrical activity in their formulations and showed how those activities feedback on each other. However, now it is necessary to include neurological control to have a complete description of heart performance, especially when changes in frequency are involved. Study of arrhythmias (or antiarrhythmic drugs) based on mathematical models should incorporate this effect to make useful predictions or point out potential pharmaceutical targets.
The importance of intrapersonal and interpersonal intelligences has long been known but educators have debated whether to and how to incorporate those topics in an already crowded engineering curriculum. In 2010, the authors used the classroom as a laboratory to observe the usefulness of including selected case studies and exercises from the fields of neurology, artificial intelligence, cognitive sciences and social psychology in a new problem-solving course. To further validate their initial findings, in 2012, the authors conducted an online survey of engineering students and engineers. The main conclusion is that engineering students will benefit from learning more about the impact of emotions, culture, diversity and cognitive biases when solving problems. Specifically, the work shows that an augmented problem-solving curriculum needs to include lessons on labelling emotions and cognitive biases, 'evidence-based' data on the importance of culture and diversity and additional practice on estimating conditional probability.
The study aimed to step into two-person (teacher-student) educational neuroscience. We describe a physiological marker of cortical hemodynamic correlates involved in teacher-student interactions during performance of a classical teaching model, the Socratic dialog. We recorded prefrontal brain activity during dialog execution simultaneously in seventeen teacher-student pairs using functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). Our main finding is that students, who successfully transferred the knowledge, showed less activity than those who not showed transfer. Correlation analysis between teacher and student activity indicate that in successful educational dialogs student and teachers 'dance at the same pace'. This is the first study measuring simultaneously brain activity of teacher-student interactions and paves future investigations of brain networks involved in complex educational interactions. (C) 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Our education systems are heirs from the paradigms conceived under the interests of the Industrial Revolution. Know has been the certain from which were managed all educational systems. However, this point seems not to have achieved its purpose, many of our citizens are still sailing into the limbo of superstition and our people continue prisoners in the clutches of injustice, hunger, corruption. Knowing is not enough, we also need the urgent desire to make the known to reject evil and wants to live in the well-known. Only then the education will be an instrument of emancipation and individual social development.
This article presents the approach to one of the perspectives commonly used by researchers to identify and characterize Learning Disabilities (LDs) as a neuropsychological disorder. However, the differences, limitations, and inaccuracies in identifying students with these conditions have raised debates that influence the social, political, educational, and clinical fields and, of course, have also affected research in this area. Contrary to such perspective, the classification systems suggested by research in this field have shown a difficulty in identifying the cases really connected to the presence of learning disabilities. In consequence, researchers, medical professionals, and educators feel the need to establish accurate identification criteria that lead to the design of intervention approaches that meet their needs. This reflects the available evidence on LD approaches that underlie the American context achieving a more comprehensive approach as well as clearer characterization and classification criteria. In short, the goal is to provide elements to support the importance of achieving a model of operationalization of LDs seeking an objective identification focused on a holistic approach and able to consider contextual and individual factors, leaving behind those deficient models that end in absolutist, categorical and reductionist conceptions.

Motor activity or motor behavior is controlled by a series of neurons from the cerebral cortex to the muscles. This paper has as objective to review the current knowledge state that exists on this fact. This event implies increasing complexity of phenomena. We begin from the muscle and we will go coupling different mechanisms to arrive the cerebral cortex. Finally, we will suggest theoretical alternatives to analyze this subject.
Without doubts neuroscience and education are two disjoint, but not separate domains, and no doubt a lot is known about the specific features of both domains. The biology of cognition (MATURANA, 1970) and cultural-biology (MATURANA & DAVILA, 2008) introduce a new epistemological framework around these dynamics which are correlated but which have their own operational coherences. This article shows that the nervous system operates distinguishing configurations and not capturing elements from an independent medium and that the phenomenon of education occurs as a transformation in coexistence.
Virtual teachings have had application in several areas, but little has been done in order to address speech disorders which affect children. Functional Dyslalia is one of the most common problems in school children, which is not caused by neurological limitations. The traditional direct treatments which therapists perform are not versatile then cannot be performed with a considerable amount of children at the same time, in order to facilitate the therapist's work. This paper discusses a virtual teaching which includes phonemes1 and symphons2 articulation activities, in order to support the reeducation process of children with functional dyslalia. Qualitative results are presented as well as a favorable response from one of the children, who is part of the sample, with functional dyslalia.
The changes occurring in the media environment over the last decade force us to revise the parameters from which media education is to be implemented today, in a new age of communications. This article seeks to provide some criteria that media education or media literacy should follow, and especially a coordinated proposal of dimensions and indicators to define the new media competence. The proposal has been made by the authors of this article from the contributions made by 50 renowned Spanish and foreign experts in Media Literacy. The proposal focuses on six major dimensions: languages; technology; interaction processes; production and dissemination processes; ideology and values, and the aesthetic dimension. And it is structured around two areas of work in every dimension: the production of their own messages and the interaction with outside messages. We propose to develop this media education in the context of participatory culture, combining critical and aesthetic thinking with the expressive capacity; the development of personal autonomy with social and cultural commitment. Finally, we propose to combine technological revolution with neurobiological revolution, assuming changes produced in the conception of the human mind, especially as regards the importance of emotions and unconscious processes over reasoned and conscious ones.

The Paper as it follows is presented as the result of a reflection on the implications of the process named acculturation in the development of linguistic competences, departing from the comprehension of the cultural phenomena affecting the learning of a second language. The reflection hereby presented is understood as an imminent complement of a previous research project on Neuroscience applied to foreign language acquisition, whenever the stage of the application of instruments designed with the purpose of creating a significant communication in both languages were applied. From this point, it was evidenced the necessity of revising the role of cultural relations in foreign language processes towards advance stages of language development.
Affection and sociability have an important organic substrate. New imaging techniques (such as hyperscanning) now allow exploring this substrate in the brain and offer some variables other than those we have had for more than two centuries of research. One of those variables is oxytocin (OXT), the so-called hormone of love, altruism and trust. In this article we present some research projects on this topic, as well as a network outline (graph) based on behaviors of social approach (associated with OXT) and their contrasting behaviors (avoidance, fear or aggression). We also present relations with diseases connected to poor socialization, such as autism and schizophrenia. The social consequences are analyzed in a philosophical context, and then we ask: Is man free to act socially? Finally, we show that currently there is an optimistic atmosphere in the scientific and philosophical community.
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is characterized by symptoms in three major domains: hyperactivity, attentional problems, and impulsivity. In addition, learning disabilities, low school performance, conduct disorders and difficulties in the interaction with their school-mates are common comorbid problems. Furthermore, ADHD is a well-established risk factor for the development of a substance use disorder. It is one the most common neurobiological chronic childhood disorder. The treatment should include psychopharmacological and/or psychological treatments. Identification of ADHD has proved to be important, considering that following a correct diagnosis, the affected individual can achieve a better quality of life and overall functioning. In this context pharmacists can play an important role, particularly in conducting prevention and health education activities, which could be of great relevance in modifying problem behaviours, knowledge and attitudes in the general population. In this study, we aimed to evaluate the rates of ADHD in adolescents from ten different high-schools in the region of La Manchuela- located between Albacete and Cuenca, in the South-East of Spain - during their second year of Compulsory Secondary Education. As part of a 4-year follow-up screening and intervention study, we conducted a cross-sectional assessment with 682 adolescents in the second-year of secondary education. Screening of ADHD was conducted with the ASRS v1.1 Questionnaire in its complete, 18-items, version. This self-administered instrument developed by WHO investigators and translated and validated into Spanish allows detection of symptoms of ADHD. A total of 682 students 51% girls and 49% boys, with an average age of 13.3 years participated in the study. Once the ASRS v1.1 test was completed, 10%, that is 69 adolescents, of the sample (52% of females and 48% of males), screened positive for ADHD. Among the ADHD positive sample, 92.8% of students were of Spanish origin, 4.3% Romanian, and a 1.4% of Bulgarian and Colombian origin, respectively. When focussing solely on those students of non-Spanish origin, of the remaining 51 students 33% were of Romanian background, 29.4% from Ecuador, 9.8% from Colombia, whilst 7.8% came from Bulgaria and Morocco, 3.9% from Argentina and Ukraine and finally 2% originated from Brazil and France. Of these 51 adolescents, we also found that a 10% of them scored positive for ADHD. In conclusion, the rates of possible cases of ADHD in the area of La Manchuela is to that reported in specialized literature in other settings.
In the educational work it is necessary the pedagogical practice is based on high levels of theoretical appropriation that allows the continuous improvement in terms of methods, procedures, and logically results that influence the learning of the child. Ownership of the content through problemica education favours creativity and logical thinking. The mental processes to reasoning, in order to obtain information and make decisions, compared with the purpose of mathematics in the curriculum guidelines are important, it considers that the knowledge of the area (their concepts and structures) are a powerful tool for the development of thinking skills. Seen in this way, mathematical knowledge and teaching problemica become allies with common goals of teaching and learning.

We describe a low cost design of an electronic neuron, which is designed to represent the dynamical properties of the membrane potential of biological neurons by modeling the states of the membrane channels. This electronic neuron can be used to study the nonlinear properties of the membrane voltage dynamics and to develop and analyze small neuronal circuits using electronic neurons as building blocks. (C) 2010 American Association of Physics Teachers. [DOI: 10.1119/1.3482256]
Animals cannot teach as humans do. Therefore, we lack the experimental support of animal studies that are so important to understand the evolution of our basic learning skills but are useless to explore the development of the teaching skills, unique to humans. And most important: children teach! We have at least two new challenges in our Mind, Brain, and Education program regarding the teaching brain. First, to implement new methods to process online the way children teach in the digital environment since the first grade of schooling with the help of computers. Second, we may also explore the teaching brain of children and adults, with the help of wearable brain image technologies in a real classroom setting. Both projects may interact in a dynamic way in neuroeducation.


Objective: Literature about journal clubs in postgraduate psychiatry programs is scarce, and there is no reference to residents' preferences. Methods: Residents were asked to respond to a survey about their general satisfaction with the current journal club format and paper preferences, according to subject, scope, and type. Results: Residents' general satisfaction was high. Residents preferred clinically relevant meta-analyses and randomized controlled trials about mood and psychotic disorders, neuroscience, and biological therapies. Conclusion: There is a trend to prefer articles related to biological aspects of psychiatry, centered in evidence-based medicine methodology. An effort should be made to broaden the scope of selection of papers, incorporating, for instance, humanistic views, psychotherapy, and other methodologies.
Albarracin AL, Farfan FD, Felice CJ. Laboratory experience for teaching sensory physiology. Adv Physiol Educ 33: 115-120, 2009; doi: 10.1152/advan.90200.2008.-The major challenge in laboratory teaching is the application of abstract concepts in simple and direct practical lessons. However, students rarely have the opportunity to participate in a laboratory that combines practical learning with a realistic research experience. In the Bioengineering Department, we started an experiential laboratory physiology to teach graduated students some aspects of sensorial physiology and exposes them to laboratory skills in instrumentation and physiological measurements. Students were able to analyze and quantify the effects of activation of mechanoreceptors in multifiber afferent discharges using equipment that was not overly sophisticated. In consequence, this practical laboratory helps students to make connections with physiological concepts acquired in theoretical classes and to introduce them to electrophysiological research.
Currently, child neuropsychology contributes developing useful methods for solving development problems. This article presents the applying results of role playing method in a Colombian population in the last school levels (48 children between 5 and 6 years old of a regular private educational institution), in the reflective thought education. The experimental group was applied the thematic roles play method and, according to Vygotsky and Elkonin, it ensures the acquisition of psychological neoformations of the preschool age. The pre-test / post-test analysis helped to show important changes in school activities of the experimental group children after the intervention.
Freud's moments. 1913: Education would be better if children it were aware of children development. Directing drive toward s worthy goals enhances both creativity and joy. 1925: Education has its functions, though it does not lead to maturity; this cannot be resolved by psychoanalysis, because transference does not work within children. The advantageous psychoanalytic instruction would go deep into psychoanalyzed teachers. 1932: the same pedagogic procedure does not homogeneously benefit, it is not possible to make a psychic prophylaxis. Children, unable to govern drives, can be psychoanalyzed. It is convenient having parents who have been psychoanalyzed, besides having a teacher who knows psychoanalytic information and therapy.
Stanislas Dehaene has published a remarkable book on the neurons of reading. It is a comprehensive description of the main issues related to the paradox of reading: how humans process linguistic information using the visual brain path while the brain has not evolved in the short period of time since the invention of writing. The article presents a powerful neuronal recycling hypothesis to explain the remarkable properties of our cultural neuroplasticity. Scientists and educators will find a trove of information and deep discussions regarding the universal challenge of teaching and learning to read.
This article describes a computerized case-based CD-ROM (CD) on international animal health that was developed to give veterinary students an opportunity to virtually work alongside veterinarians and other veterinary students as they try to solve challenging disease problems relating to tuberculosis in South African wildlife, bovine abortion in Mexico, and neurologic disease in horses in Rapa Nui, Chile. Each of the three case modules presents, in a highly interactive format, a problem or mystery that must be solved by the learner. As well as acquiring information via video clips and text about the specific health problem, learners obtain information about the different countries, animal-management practices, diagnostic methods, related disease-control issues, economic factors, and the opinions of local experts. After assimilating this information, the learner must define the problem and formulate an action plan or make a recommendation or diagnosis. The computerized program invokes three principles of adult education: active learning, learner-centered education, and experiential learning. A medium that invokes these principles is a potentially efficient learning tool and template for developing other case-based problem-solving computerized programs. The program is accessible on the World Wide Web at <http://www.calf.vetmed.ucdavis.edu/html/International_web/international_menu.html>. A broadband Internet connection is recommended, since the modules make extensive use of embedded video and audio clips. Information on how to obtain the CD is also provided.
In this paper, we present a partial advance of the project of development investigation of, tools for data mining, which consists on the implementation of Adaptative Resonance Network (ART2) for the clustering data. The implemented technique is compared with Self-Organizing Maps and the algorithm EM (Expectation Maximization) with the purpose of measuring the clustering effectiveness.

The purpose of this study was to analyze the cognitive profile of stuttering children. A sample of 290 children was obtained from an elementary school in Bogota (Colombia) (149 boys, 141 girls). Three right-handed boys were classified as stutterers. In general, performance in stuttering children was similar to the performance in the total sample. Statistically significant differences in two test scores were observed with a higher performance in the stuttering group: Finger Tapping Test with the left hand and Quantitative Concepts from the Woodcock Psychoeducational Battery. These results do not support the existence of any cognitive deficit in stuttering children when wing standard neuropsychological testing procedures. However, in two of three stuttering children, some developmental abnormalities were mentionded by their parents (hyperactivity associated with inattention in one child and difficulties in learning to read in the other child). It is proposed that these developmental abnormalities might be the result of the emotional and communication difficulties generally associated with stuttering. These results, on the other hand, support a bihemispheric control of fine movements, as has been frequently mentioned in stuttering research.
We hypothesized that children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) would underperform on neuropsychological tests that are sensitive to executive function impairments. We further proposed that a linear discriminant analysis using behavioral and neuropsychological variables as dependent variables would pinpoint the capability of behavioral questionnaires and neuropsychological tests to predict the correct classification of ADHD and control children. We designed a transversal study with 62 seven- to twelve-year-old children with ADHD and 62 Full Scale IQ-matched controls using two behavioral scales and 13 neuropsychological tests. Using analysis of variance and covariance with age and school achievement and multifactor analysis of variance, we found that behavioral variables established robust, statistically significant differences between groups (p < .001). Children with ADHD scored worse than controls on 31 out of 61 neuropsychological variables. Children with ADHD, however, obtained better scores that were statistically significant on WISC-R Comprehension and Picture completion. A linear discriminant analysis with nine behavioral variables correctly classified 100% of the participants in both groups. Another linear discriminant analysis using 10 neuropsychological variables correctly classified 85.48% of the participants in both groups. We propose a core battery of selected tests for assessing children with ADHD. The significance of cross-cultural analyses of different developmental disturbances is emphasized.
The purpose of the study was to analyze the relative efficacies of two treatments for children with learning difficulties. The first treatment consisted of multiple training components targeting specific cognitive and behavioral factors; the second treatment provided emotional support and supervision of school tasks. The participants were 94 Chilean schoolchildren (6 to 11 years of age). The efficacies were compared on (a) neurocognitive tests, (b) school achievement tests, and (c) behavior in school and at home. The results indicated that both groups improved on most of the outcome measures. The first group showed best results in parents' rating of home behavior, and the second group in reading. The findings also emphasized the importance of emotional support and the inclusion of a parents' group in treatment for children with learning difficulties.
