The teaching of mathematics is a topic of concern in the fields of pedagogy, psychology and neuroscience. Many primary and secondary school students show little interest in studying mathematics, which is accompanied by poor marks, low school success rates and learning disabilities. It is possible to think that these difficulties are general throughout the population and not related only to pathological developmental conditions and disabilities. Within psychology, the cultural-historical approach and activity theory allow us to analyse and characterize the content of educational methods. This study analyses three proposals for teaching mathematics in the third year of preschool education in Mexico according to type of orientation, the concepts taught, the actions the teacher does with the students and the classroom communication. It discusses the need to reconsider the content of educational work in preschool institutions in order to guarantee children's optimal level of preparation for the conceptual learning of mathematics in primary school.
Introduction: Sugar is the main source of energy for nearly all animals. However, consumption of a high amount of sugars can lead to many metabolic disorders hence, balancing calorie intake in the form of sugar is required. Various herbs are in use to control body weight, cure diabetes and control elevated blood sugar levels. One such herb is Gymnema sylvestre commonly called Gurmar (destroyer of sugar). Gurmar selectively inhibits sugar sensation by mechanisms that are still elusive. Objectives: The primary objective of this study is to understand the effect of gurmar on sweet taste feeding behaviour in insects using the invertebrate model system Drosophila melanogaster. Methods: For this study, we used feeding assays, spectrophotometry and Proboscis Extension Reflex (PER) assay to determine how flies detect gurmar. Additionally, life span analysis, egg-laying behaviour and developmental profiles were used to probe the role of gurmar on the overall health of the flies. During the whole study, we used only the raw powdered form of gurmar (dried leaves) to examine its effect on sweet taste feeding behaviour. Results: Our data demonstrate that whole gurmar in a raw powdered form is aversive to flies and inhibits sugar evoked PER and feeding responses. Also, we observed it takes at least 24 h of starvation time to reduce the consumption of sugar in flies pre-fed on gurmar. Flies lay a fewer number of eggs on gurmar media and show developmental defects. Our data suggest that flies detect gurmar using both taste and olfactory cues. Conclusion: Understanding how gurmar reshapes taste curves to promote reduced consumption of sugars in flies will open up avenues to help people with health issues related to high sugar consumption, but our data also highlights that its consumption should be carefully considered since gurmar is aversive to flies and has detrimental effects on development.
This study investigated the influence of phonological word representations from both first language (L1) and second language (L2) on third language (L3) lexical learning in L1-dominant Spanish-English bilinguals. More specifically, we used event-related potentials (ERPs) to determine whether L1 Spanish and L2 English phonology modulates bilinguals' brain response to newly learned L3 Slovak words, some of which had substantial phonological overlap with either L1 or L2 words (interlingual homophones) in comparison to matched control words with little or no phonological overlap. ERPs were recorded from a group of 20 Spanish-English bilinguals in response to 120 auditory Slovak words, both before and after a three-day-long learning period during which they associated the L3 Slovak novel words with their L1 Spanish translations. Behaviorally, both L1 Spanish and L2 English homophony facilitated the learning of L3 Slovak words in a similar manner. In contrast, the electrophysiological results of the post-training ERPs, but not the pre-training ERPs, showed an N100 effect for L2 English interlingual homophones and opposite N400 effects for L1 Spanish and L2 English interlingual homophones in comparison to control words. These findings suggest different neurocognitive mechanisms in the use of L1 and L2 phonological information when learning novel words in an L3.
Ongoing research shows that online teaching has become a popular source of learning at educational institutions. Evidence illustrates that many international students encounter challenges in their online classes. These difficulties are involved in communication with professors and peers, and their engagement with the coursework. This study extends the existing literature, as its focus is on how instructors can teach with love by integrating the modes of new literacies. International graduate students (N = 17) participated in this exploratory case study. This study suggests that instructors use the interactive online teaching (IOT) model, into which the modes of new literacies are incorporated, share love, and be socially present to respond to all their students' needs. The researcher recommends instructors build engagement in their online community using the triple A concept: be accessible, be accountable, and be adaptative. The findings provide guidelines for practitioners to enhance learning and exchange information with international students in online classes.
Background: Developing sex and sexuality education programmes for adolescents has proved challenging in many parts of the world, especially in contexts where the importance of these programmes is not valued. In such settings, educating about sex and sexuality may also require dealing with detractors who are active in spreading misinformation. Objective: This article identifies contextual barriers encountered by those involved in developing the echale Neurona programme in Mexico. Team members associated with the programme have been teaching about sex and sexuality in public secondary and high schools since 2016. Methods and design: Grounded theory approach using semi-structured interviews. Interviews took place with 10 participants including health promotion experts and programme officials. The main focus of the interviews was on the contextual limitations encountered when implementing sex and sexuality education workshops. Results: Findings reveal at least three types of barriers hindering the comprehensive sex and sexuality education developed by the programme: institutional, cultural and socio-educational barriers. Conclusion: Contextual barriers associated with family and school environments posed a significant challenge to implementation. Such barriers may facilitate or hinder sex and sexuality education programmes affecting the way young people develop their sex lives and live their sexuality.
Excitable cells are those that, when stimulated, generate an ion-dependent action potential; between them are neurons. The action potential has been a relevant target of study concerning cellular communication and behavior. This work aims to implement and validate the action potential of an excitable cell through resistance/capacitor (RC) circuits based on a mathematical/electrical model. This perspective can help researchers understand an excitable cell's action potential from a mathematical and electrical approximation using a simple model. The experiment was designed based on RC circuits associated with the ionic channels of sodium (Na+) and potassium (K+). The proposed model also incorporates the 'dendrite' action not employed in the Hodgkin and Huxley model. Thus, a linear function by parts was used in mathematical modeling, recreating the excitable cell's behavior through numerical and electronic simulation. The proposed mathematical/electrical model includes dendrites and capacitors not considered in previous models. In this scheme, the dendrite joined to the RC circuit describes the behavior as physiological, concerning the action potentials and the ions responsible.
In this article, we critique the science of reading when it is positioned within the reading wars as settling disagreements about reading and how it should be taught. We frame our argument in terms of troublesome binaries, specifically between nature and nurture. We interpret that binary in relation to Overton's distinction between split and relational metatheories, with the latter suggesting a more integrative view of nature and nurture. Focusing on the nature side of the binary, which predominates when the science of reading is promoted in the reading wars, we argue that its singular focus limits the range of scientific inquiry, interpretation, and application to practice. Specifically, we address limitations of the science of reading as characterized by a narrow theoretical lens, an abstracted empiricism, and uncritical inductive generalizations derived from brain-imaging and eye movement data sources. Finally, we call for a relational metatheoretical stance and offer emulative examples of that stance in the field.
This work presents a real-time biofeedback tool that employs wearables and the Internet of Things with educational applications to improve students' learning and retention. We aimed to create a web platform using the Internet of Things (IoT) and Machine Learning (ML) architecture to predict students' performance, analyze mental fatigue, and provide real-time quantitative biofeedback to identify the best learning modality. Thus, the main goal was to develop a system that allows students to learn and improve their projects. We integrated the analysis of real-time biometric signals, machine learning algorithms, and web services as we observed their behavior under different learning modalities, seeking to improve cognitive performance. For this, 23 volunteers filled out the ten-question Fatigue Assessment Scale questionnaire about mental fatigue, validated with the P300 waves acquired during auditory-oddball (AO) tests. Synchronized data acquisition was achieved using Enophones and an E4 wristband. To develop predictive models, we collected the biometric data and incorporated it into an ML algorithm to visualize students' performance in real time. The system can accommodate other wearable systems with new features in further experiments. Thus, we believe this current development has the potential to further revolutionize traditional teaching with this methodology and future enhancements.
Given the significance that technology-enhanced learning (TEL) receives in learning analytics, this study presents a neural deep learning architecture aimed to enhance a smart environment of a digital humanities laboratory. Presented a humanistic subject/controversy, the students interacted by producing multi-modal data (text, images, sound, movement) captured and processed with programmed devices. The smart environment induces emotional states during students' interactions and tasks in various scenarios, capturing images and facial expressions to classify student emotions. This study set up a preliminary experiment, testing the learning analytics model to show how it works and what outputs could be obtained. Leveraging the benefits of non-contact sensor technology, affective computing, and artificial intelligence, we collected biometric and neurocognitive data to establish correlations in the learning production of students studying humanistic and artistic topics. Despite the extended opinion expressed in the literature that the humanities do not have solid references on which to base learning analytics, this study shows that much quantitative data is available in such resources.
Childhood obesity has become an epidemic in the U.S. and many other countries around the world. Beyond reflecting population weight gain trends, children with Down syndrome are at higher risk for having overweight/obesity than children with typical development or children with other intellectual disabilities. Accordingly, we examine the prevalence of overweight/obesity in children with Down syndrome. We also consider phenotypic features that may contribute to the higher risk of overweight/obesity in this neurogenetic syndrome. Additionally, because having overweight/obesity is more than a number on a scale, we review associated outcomes in childhood through adulthood. We also survey the extant research informing our understanding regarding intervention for overweight/obesity in Down syndrome. Finally, we conclude our review by evaluating the existing evidence and making recommendations for future research.
Undergraduates use a spike sorting routine developed in Octave to analyze the spiking activity generated from mechanical stimulation of spines of cockroach legs with the inexpensive SpikerBox amplifier and the free software Audacity. Students learn the procedures involved in handling the cockroaches and recording extracellular action potentials (spikes) with the SpikerBox apparatus as well as the importance of spike sorting for analysis in neuroscience. The spike sorting process requires students to choose the spike threshold and spike selection criteria and interact with the clustering process that forms the groups of similar spikes. Once the spike groups are identified, interspike intervals and neuron firing frequencies can be calculated and analyzed. A classic neurophysiology lab exercise is thus adapted to be interdisciplinary for underrepresented students in a small rural college.
In this article a documental review is unfolded that has as fundamental objective to analyze the relevance of cognitive science in articulation with educational field. For the sake of reflectioning about notion of subject, it is determined important to review the neoliberalism speech and its inscription in the enigma of subjectivity. To resignify the human experience factor, implies to overcome challenges of biological reductionist vision, to privilege the maxim of unconscious knowledge. The hermeneutical tour of this document takes up an interdisciplinary scaffolding, which base is represented by disciplines like: philosophy, neuroscience and psychoanalysis. To this effect, it is considered necessary to carry out a change of paradigm shift that ponders over History and subjective constitution, in opposition of practices that degrades the uniqueness of human being. To prioritize the influence of social environment on students 'life, joined to safeward their mental, physical and psychological development, it is outlined as a key requirement to hold an ideal operation of nervous system and construction of psychism. It is imperative to extend the advance of science to the auspices of public politics, to link neurocientific knowledge and subjective condition to teachers training spaces, it is an exercise of educational prophylaxis.
Many engineering professors teach their classes without having received previous training in psycho-pedagogy and neuroscience. While a few of them have received some form of pedagogical training during their academic career, the vast majority have not acquired any training in the field of didactics, that is, in the science of teaching. Teaching is a difficult task, and teaching effectively is even more difficult. Much literature exists on different teaching-learning methodologies that have been empirically tested in engineering studies. However, practically none of these works make reference to the main factor in any learning process: how does the human brain learn? This paper analyses learning from the perspective of its three main phases (motivation, attention, memorization), and how these phases should be addressed in a lecture, since many of the Engineering classes at universities around the world are given as lectures. The current knowledge of neuroscience is used in the paper to provide twelve recommendations on how a lecture should be successfully given in Engineering Degrees. For the selection of these twelve tips, we use two criteria: they must be relevant in a lecture, and they must have a neuroscientific basis, which is explained in the framework of the paper. The relationship between the twelve tips and the seven principles of good practice in undergraduate studies enunciated by Chickering and Gamson has also been established. The relation of each tip with the learning phases to which it refers is explained, and an example of how to apply it in a lecture is given. This paper presents a new way of working in engineering education: how to apply the knowledge provided by neuroscience to the teaching-learning process. This work provides some ideas about how this can be done in a lecture, but it is also necessary to conduct experiments to validate the effectiveness of the twelve tips proposed herein. It is likewise necessary to carry out similar work for other teaching methodologies such as PBL, flipped classroom or service-learning. The future of education cannot be developed without taking into account the functioning of the human brain or by applying educational practices that are unsupported by scientific evidence of their effectiveness.
At this paper, we aim to offer a methodology for the collection and study of multimodal data through the integration and use of a brain-computer interface system better known as BCI, which facilitate the reading of physiological activity through electroencephalography (EEG) techniques to achieve analyzing cognitive processes that occur in subjects who are within a classroom voluntarily willing to learn. The BCI device of the NeuroSky brand, which is considered a low cost device, was used in conjunction with the free use software neuroexperimenter, where, being used together, it is possible to collect multimodal data in a traditional classroom; the obtained products served as a basis for conducting analysis of learning processes, to understand what happens from a perspective of cognitive neuroscience. The products of this methodology can be used as a reference for building reports to provide teachers feedback, where physiological data on the levels of attention in students open the opportunity to interpret the impacts of teaching activities. The relevance of this paper lies in the opportunity found to use BCI technologies so as to carry out studies within a classroom in an objective manner without using instruments such as a questionnaire.
Aim: To evaluate the efficacy of Neurologic Music Therapy (NMT) using a traditional and a technological intervention (elastic touch-display) in improving the coordination of children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), as a primary outcome, and the timing and strength control of their movements as secondary outcomes. Methods: Twenty-two children with ASD completed 8 NMT sessions, as a part of a 2-month intervention. Participants were randomly assigned to either use an elastic touch-display (experimental group) or tambourines (control group). We conducted pre- and post- assessment evaluations, including the Developmental Coordination Disorder Questionnaire (DCDQ) and motor assessments related to the control of strength and timing of movements. Outcomes and results: All participants improved their coordination, according to the DCDQ scores, and exhibited better control of their movements according to the strength and timing assessments after the intervention. Participants who used the elastic touch-display scored higher on the DCDQ. Conclusions and implications: NMT is an efficacious treatment to improve the coordination skills of children with ASD. Elastic touch-displays provide more benefits than the use of tambourines.
Anatomical sciences curricula have been under constant reform over the years, with many countries having to reduce course hours while trying to preserve laboratory time. In Mexico, schools have historically been autonomous and unregulated, and data regarding structure and methods are still lacking. A national survey was sent by the Mexican Society of Anatomy to 110 anatomical sciences educators. The questionnaire consisted of 50 items (open and multiple choice) for gross anatomy, microscopic anatomy, neuroanatomy, and embryology courses in medical schools across Mexico. A clinical approach was the most common course approach in all disciplines. Contact course hours and laboratory hours were higher in Mexican anatomy education compared to other countries, with the highest reported contact hours for embryology (133.4 +/- 44.1) and histology (125 +/- 33.2). There were similar contact hours to other countries for gross anatomy (228.5 +/- 60.5). Neuroanatomy course hours (43.9 +/- 13.1) were less than reported by the United States and similar to Saudi Arabia and higher than the United Kingdom. Dissection and microscopy with histological slides predominate as the most common laboratory activities. Traditional methods prevail in most of the courses in Mexico and only a few educators have implemented innovative and technological tools. Implementation of new methods, approaches, and curricular changes are needed to enhance anatomical sciences education in Mexico.
Neurodiversity is an umbrella term, including dyspraxia, dyslexia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, dyscalculia, autistic spectrum and Tourette syndrome. The increasing number of students with learning difficulties associated with neurodiversity entering higher education (HE) poses a shared and growing challenge internationally for teachers and institutional leaders. This narrative synthesis draws together a corpus of international literature on how neurodiverse students experience higher education and the ways in which higher education institutions respond to the cluster of neurodiverse conditions. A systematic review was carried out to search, retrieve, appraise and synthesize the available evidence to provide an original contribution to the literature and significant insights of worth to higher education internationally. An inclusive approach to data extraction was used to ensure that all the relevant studies were included. All stages of the review process, including the initial search, screening, sample selection and analysis, are described. Three main themes and 11 subthemes were identified. Although the majority of publications focus on either dyslexia, autistic spectrum disorder, or ADHD, some common themes are evident in student experience across learning difficulties associated with neurodiversity. Although support services and technologies are available to meet students' specific needs, there is an apparent dislocation between the two. Fear of stigmatization and labelling worsens the divide between what is needed and what is available to ensure neurodiverse students' success in higher education, where good intentions are evidently not enough.
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are known to suffer from catastrophic forgetting: when learning multiple tasks, they perform well on the most recently learned task while failing to perform on previously learned tasks. In biological networks, sleep is known to play a role in memory consolidation and incremental learning. Motivated by the processes that are known to be involved in sleep generation in biological networks, we developed an algorithm that implements a sleeplike phase in ANNs. In an incremental learning framework, we demonstrate that sleep is able to recover older tasks that were otherwise forgotten. We show that sleep creates unique representations of each class of inputs and neurons that were relevant to previous tasks fire during sleep, simulating replay of previously learned memories.
This study aims to develop a biofeedback tool to assess the efficiency of different learning and teaching techniques. Here, neuroengineering tools are used to detect and compare the level of learning obtained through two different modalities: a traditional text and an interactive video. Electroencephalographic signals were recorded in two groups during learning tasks, and performance was evaluated with an exam. Results showed better performance on the video group, as well as power changes in theta and beta bands, mainly in frontal and occipital cortices. A real time monitoring protocol of these features could be implemented to develop a learning evaluation tool based on biometric signals.
Social innovation aims for creating social value primarily while it recognizes that not all technology-based progress amounts to social progress. We think that this calls for a paradigm shift in how we understand education. No one doubts that education requires intense cognitive effort, but educational proposals certainly vary depending on how cognition is understood. In this article, we suggest that different ways of understanding human development are related to different ways of understanding cognition. Thus, these different conceptions of human development affect their resulting educational proposal. While not an exhaustive account, we sketch out three models of human development, the so-called autonomous self (AS), processual self (PS), and inter-processual self (IPS). Each has different implications for education depending on their particular understanding of cognition. The AS and PS models understand cognition as a primarily rational mastery exercise, with the difference that PS uses relationships and diverse psychological faculties for the subject's cognitive development, whereas AS relies more on the subject's rational agency. On the other hand, IPS understands cognition as a relational act that, when it arises from interiority, affects all dimensions of the person. In the present article, we explore the educational consequences of these different ways of understanding cognition with the assistance of interdisciplinary dialogue from philosophy, psychology, and neuroscience, and their repercussion on social innovation with the intention of opening up reflection in the field of education and of inspiring its practitioners to rethink the model they assume. We will conclude with reflections informing educational implications for the design of programs and teacher training itself.
The purpose of this study is to enrich emotional intelligence theory. A contribution is made to emotional literacy by distinguishing words like impulse, affection, feeling, emotion, and affectivity. Likewise, the implications of such distinction in humanization are depicted. The research method is of a complex nature. Background information about emotional intelligence are presented; its limitations and potentialities such as the ups and downs of the psychologization of education, cognitive psychology, neuromyths, and the theory of emotional intelligence and feelings. This article calls for humanization of an altruistic humanity in the pursuit of a utopia.
The aim of learning analytics (LA) is to understand and optimize learning and the environments in which it occurs. Given the complex nature of learning it has become necessary to use tools from various fields of research to obtain, describe, analyze and interpret data about students, their learning processes and contexts. Rather than taking isolated methods or techniques for the study of this process, learning analytics is beginning to integrate the perspectives of other fields to achieve a research of learning with a transdisciplinary vision. One of these fields is neurosciences, specifically those related to learning or educational neurosciences. The objective of this research is to explore the implications and challenges of the use of EEG technologies (traditionally used in neurological studies) in conjunction with learning analytics for the study of students learning processes and their context.
This article presents a model for the analysis of data on the Internet, using Web mining, to find knowledge about large amounts of information in cyberspace. To test the proposed method, Web pages on Cyberbullying were analyzed as a case study. The procedure integrates a Web Scraper to locate and download information from the Internet, to recover the vocabulary are used techniques of Natural Language Processing (tokenization, cleaning of words without meaning, frequency of term, inverse frequency of the document, synonyms, stemming methods). To obtain knowledge, a dataset was constructed using semantic ontologies to define the predictive variables of Cyberbullying and supervised learning to define the variable to be predicted. To evaluate the efficiency of the model, algorithms of machine learning, AdaBoost and Neural Network were used. The results reveal a percentage of 97% accuracy in the detection of Cyberbullying vocabulary, which was approved through cross-validation, achieving a time saving of 581% with parallel processing, compared to sequential processing.
In this article we're going to expose the design and construction of a support tool for programming, with the objective of assist on educative activities oriented to programming for people with physical impairments, on particular paresis (partial paralysis), localized paralysis on arms and wrists as well as quadriplegia. Software functions are based on a set of instructions load in using voice commands, discerning the key words on the voice commands and the language instructions. A first prototype of the tool, Mancodev, was built, supporting the Javascript programming language. Two tests were applied to the prototype. The first test was validation of users with disability, with five participants, validating its operation from the point of view of a beginner student of programming. In the second test, ten university-level students participated in courses related to the Programming area, this test was carried out to obtain feedback on the functionality that exists from the point of view of a more experienced programmer. The tests consisted of problem solving through the use of the software. The results of the tests have allowed the detection of some failures and shortcomings of the software, in addition to raising support for other programming languages.
The objective of this article is to analyze the triadic relationship between education, psychology and neuroscience within the framework of neuroeducation. To this end, an exhaustive review of the most relevant literature on the subject was carried out. The historical precedents of neuroeducation can be traced back to the introduction of psychological discourse in education, which later transformed into the psychologization of school. Arguably, the irruption of the neuro in the culture and the advent of the new neurosubjectivities ended up dethroning psychology of its privileged position in the educational context. Under promises of liberation, independence and scientificity, neuroeducation prospered precipitously without addressing the multiplicity of philosophical, methodological and ethical difficulties that still plagues it. However, the structural relationship between psychology and neuroscience reveals the inability of the latter to detach itself from the psi paradigm. Moreover, from the counterpsychology theory and considering its analog behavior, it can be argued that the neuro, rather than an independent stage, is an extension of the psi conditioned to this epoch. Under this approach, neuroeducation is not an alternative to psychological predominance but a return to it which threatens neurologization. Thus, it is imperative that learning is reconnected to culture, educational spaces are reconquered, and the teachers are made aware of their agency so that education can, without ignoring the valuable contributions of the other disciplines, recognize itself as an autonomous knowledge, eminently integrationist and independent.
In this chapter, we draw on Gibson's (1979) description of affordances to consider cultural differences in motivation and learning. We develop the argument that affordances are at the heart of cultural differences. We address the way culture influences both what and how people learn from the affordances that are available to them in their physical and social environments. Brain processes of neural plasticity and psychological learning mechanisms of repetition and connection drawn from the Unified Learning Model (Shell et al., 2010) are used to explain how our brain and memory store knowledge of affordances, as well as the actions needed to take advantage of these affordances. We then discuss the way attention sits at the intersection of motivation and learning, as well as how motivated attention leads to individual and cultural differences in knowledge and use of affordances, both implicitly and volitionally. Finally, the emergence of cultural differences in attention, learning, knowing, and motivation are discussed, with an emphasis on the impact of culture on learning in school.
Creativity as a psychological phenomenon implies molecular processes, in the strict sense of the term, as well as global processes that can contemplate social or cultural interaction. The study of creativity, from the neurosciences perspective, has yielded findings that range from the genetic to the neuroanatomical. However, such findings are likely to have incomplete, or even erroneous, understanding if mediation of other variables is not considered. The objective of this work is to link emotional processing and creative attitude with the psychobiological variables associated with creativity. To do this, a review of the literature is made in which some approaches to creativity from the neurosciences are highlighted. It was considered that they were metaanalytic or critical review works, as well as empirical studies, which in both cases were indexed in Web of Science and had at least two citations per year, except for studies of 2017. As a result of the analysis of genetic studies, neurotransmission and others at the level of neuroimaging and electroencephalography, possible links to findings of work on emotional processing are indicated. The creative attitude, in turn, guiding the creative performances, gives a more comprehensive sense to such linkage. Finally, the findings of neuroscience are discussed in terms of the need to provide more limited frameworks that allow better explanations.
Objective: To analyze the prevalence of neuromyths in a sample of Ecuadorian students with careers related to education. Methods: We administered a questionnaire to 328 participants in order to evaluate their belief in neuromyths and general knowledge about the brain. Results: 97.87% of the respondents are interested in neurosciences in relation to learning and 91.16% consider that they are relevant in their professional work; However, only 45.12% read periodicals about this and 37.20% have received formal instruction in the subject. On average, the sample failed to identify 56% (SD = 27%) of the neuromyths and correctly answered 54% (SD = 25%) of the general knowledge questions, without showing significant differences by gender. Contrary to the literature, age was the only significant predictor of the belief in neuromyths and interest, reading and instruction negatively predicted general knowledge in neurosciences. Moreover, no significant correlations were found between age, belief in neuromyths and general knowledge in neurosciences. The results obtained with respect to the prevalence of neuromyths are consistent with past research in Latin American and European samples. Conclusions: Neuromyths represent a particularly alarming threat in developing countries and their study is essential for the design of new and better initiatives that contribute to their reduction.
In the present essay we delve into the reflection of the concept of learning from the knowledge provided by neuroscience and the sciences of complexity, it's relevance from the perspective of learning by learning, understanding how we learn, the relevance of lifelong learning and what it implies in the educational doing in the social knowledge. Approaches that seek to provide elements for a dialogue around the principle of learning throughout life, action that involves the learning process for developing the being in the plasticity of continuous learning.
The present investigation consisted in analyzing the impact of the application of a program of motor activity linked to executive functions, in order to contribute to the development of cognition, executive functions, motor skills, reading, writing and mathematics. The sample consisted of 66 children (35 experimental group and 31 control group) with normal development and ages ranging from 5.2 to 6.9 years, the average was 6.2 +/- 054, who attended third kindergarten and first grade of a public school of the city of Leon, Spain. To carry out the program, the children made their materials and their parents supported them in the design of the most difficult materials. The program was completed in 45 sessions 2 per week, with a duration of 60 minutes each, during 6 months, being transcendental that a week a month the parents of the family participated in the class. The instruments used were: Merrill Palmer Revised Developmental Scale, NEPSY Test II, Infant Neuropsychological Maturity Questionnaire, Movement Assessment Battery for Children-2 and Mathematical Competence Test Basic. The most relevant results indicate that in the pre-test and post-test experimental group there are significant differences in: motor cognition, executive functions, writing and reading with a p < 0.05. Among the control groups and experimental post-test, significant differences were found p < 0.05 in: motor cognition, executive functions, writing and reading. In conclusion: the importance of creating motor programs linked to the executive functions is emphasized in order to strengthen the integral formation of the child.
Storytelling to heal consists in utilizing a didactic technique along with the use of applicable video, social networks, legos and other educational materials to teach the students at our institution about different academic programs, to help victims of the September 19th, 2017 earthquake here in Mexico. In the shelters, our youths took different items and foods to the victims; however, the most important aspect was the storytelling to entertain and help victims come to terms with their tragedy and find meaning. Each September, our university, el Tecnologico de Monterrey, sponsors a week program we call Week i. It is here that the teacher create projects along with students to make available experiences different to the norm in the academic program. The objective is for the students to become narrators that take stories to the shelters to entertain both children and adults as a means to inspire them to tell their own stories. of healing narratives is to promote the concept of resilience. According to Boris Cyrulnik, the most simplistic explanation of this concept is: the resumption of new development after a traumatic event. This process involves many elements: neurological, artistic, sociologic, anthropological, biological and symbolic, but it also encompasses a great deal of affect. The students understood the importance of language and the history so that the human mind orders, assimilates, understands and communicates traumatic events. They designed and applied historical narrative activities to permit those impacted by the earthquake to accept their losses and find meaning in life by means of those narratives. Afterwards, they collected those stories and produced trans-meditative messages from the victims to broadcast these experiences. The primary objective was for the students to tackle this exceptionally painful reality and listen to the community impacted by the incident using narrative techniques that served to release tensions, provide feeling and formulate a story that establishes a benchmark regarding these kinds of events that could occur in the future. We carried out collaborative work, interviews, mastery of new information technologies, setting and carrying out work priorities, telling and constructing stories of different by different media and critical and creative thinking.
Down syndrome (DS) is characterized by attentional problems. Little is known about the neural correlates of attention problems in DS due to difficulties in evaluation. Pupil dilation, associated with an increase in cognitive load and locus coeruleus-noradrenaline system activity in humans, is a neurophysiological measurement that may help to characterize such problems. The aim of this research was to investigate the link between a phasic pupil dilation response and target detection in people with DS, as compared with a control group with typical development (TD) matched by mental age. Participants performed an oddball task by means of an eye-tracker and a series of neuropsychological tests. Although the DS and control group demonstrated similar attentional skills and behavioral performance, the participants with DS showed greater pupil dilation. This result suggests that people with DS expend extra cognitive effort to achieve performance similar to those with TD. This finding is discussed in light of the attentional process in DS and the reliability of pupil dilation measurement in the study of attention and other cognitive processes in DS.
The topic of ethics and its relation to leadership is a pedagogical concern for organizations and educators alike. However, current empirical and instructional approaches to leadership still lack a critical perspective on the topic of fairness. We take an initial step as a response to this gap in management education by introducing a learning activity focused on leader-member exchange (LMX) and its implications for fairness in the workplace. This proposed pedagogical approach incorporates a classroom-based game to emphasize two critical psychological strategies for learning: emotional learning and depth of processing. We hope that this pedagogical approach and emphasis on these two learning strategies will contribute to management education by 1) responding to recent calls to critically appraise and redesign the manner in which we currently teach leadership, particularly as it relates to humanizing the concept and highlighting its workplace fairness components, 2) bringing to light two critical learning strategies known to facilitate the commitment of new information to memory, 3) exposing students to a facet of leadership they are likely to experience in their first professional entry-level positions, and 4) facilitating a discussion of leadership more broadly. (C) 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
A profession's knowledge is obtained in college in two ways: through academic approaches poured into the curriculum, and through abilities and skills they have acquired and are transmitted informally by the teachers. It is called hidden curriculum to all the knowledge of importance that teachers teach voluntarily or involuntarily. The main objective of this paper is to describe in particular how the students acquired knowledge and skills in their work from the knowledge transmitted by some of their teachers and with the characteristic that this knowledge is not part of the curriculum requirements. These results come from interviews made to all graduates of the generation 2014 who completed their studies at the University Center of Los Altos University of Guadalajara in Mexico. We present in a more specific manner how psychologists acquired skills they use in their work related to the neurological field even without using the psychometric material that are supposed to be used in laboratory, practice that was not carried out by the lack of necessary component. Similar facts regarding the application of group dynamics in labor skills, development of psychodiagnosis and neuropsychology were observed. All of this was possible because teachers who were in charge of different subjects, transmitted skills they have cultivated through daily practice of their profession and the main characteristic of those that knowledge are not explicit in the Psychology curricula.
This research proposes a study conducted with students who show intelectual disabilities, from a sociocultural perspective. The main objective was to favour the logical thought by using mediating activities to strengthen five operations of such process. The design of this investigation was quasi experimental, the logical thinking was measured before and afther the application of mediating activities, using a control group and an experimental group. The tools were the Wisc-IV (sub area of drawing concepts) and the Infantile Neuropsicological Evaluation ENI, the executive functions area only. To determine the generalization of data an alternative test was structured for scholar periods. By comparing the scores between the two groups afther the intervention, the existence of differences amongst the scores was detected, being relevant the ones found within the semantic graphic fluency element and the cognitive flexibility by number of categories. Even tough within other evaluated variables there were no significant differences, the data points towards an adequate repercussion of the mediated activities over the student's performance
Currently educational systems face different challenges; one of them is to implement new teaching methods that allow personalize educational processes. Structure of the curriculum, the selection of content, chosen methodologies, the use of advanced resources, models evaluation, organization of educational institutions..., have to conform to the new knowledge available to society to teach better and achieve equally, better and more functional learning in students ' Pizarro (2003). The principles of cognitive neuroscience have revolutionized concepts such as intelligence and development; recognize that plasticity is the ability of the brain remain open to ongoing environmental influences throughout life and be changed by it, deeply challenges the teacher to understand that education is a determining factor in the construction of the brain and the expectations that can be generated on the development of students regardless the deficit to submit. This article introduces the most outstanding contributions of cognitive neuroscience for the creation of learning environments from the inclusive paradigm.
Multisensory stimulation through cameras Snoezelen intervention to improve the quality of life of people through a series of environmental stimuli and allowing the reactivation of neural networks who receive them (brain plasticity) is defined, allowing cortical rehabilitation at an early age. In Mexico, they have been applied in the Neurorehabilitation in children with brain damage with therapeutic and rehabilitative purposes, but now our research is aimed at the application of these techniques in school spaces with children between 3-6 years of age with physical disabilities in order to demonstrate the impact of intensive multisensory stimulation on cognitive functions.
Language is a superior skill that has characterized, differentiated and marked human evolution, Madriz-Bermudez and Sibaja-Trejos (2013). In this sense, Mussen et al (1990:131) argue that the child should be exposed to a language to learn it, acquires it by interacting with other people, when listening to well-formed sentences. The result of the investigation of Madriz et al. (2012) conducted in three Latin American countries, Costa Rica, Ecuador and Mexico, show the trend of preschool teachers to favour the teaching of the written language in the classroom, isolating from the verbal language. Also it highlighted the need to develop research projects related to language to learn the neurodidactic strategies developed by preschool teachers in educational centers of prioritary attention in Costa Rica and determine if these are suitable for the population field of study. In response to the findings and identified needs, the project presented here has been designed, whose aim is to develop an educational proposal to promote the stimulation of communication skills at an early age in educational centers of prioritary attention of Costa Rica metropolitan area, addressed to preschool teachers and parents.

The aim of this descriptive study is to determine the characteristics of reading and writing errors of Colombian children who are in second grade and who don't present neuropsychological issues. To achieve this goal, 61 children aged between 7 and 9 years old were divided in two groups, the first group was formed by students with high or superior achievement in Spanish, and other was formed by those with basic or lower achievement in Spanish. Results allowed to identify and compare errors and grammatical categories used from both groups. Differences and similarities were found in both groups such as the following mistakes: omission, substitutions, additions, translocations, orthographic mistakes, mirror-writing, word joining and segmentation. We concluded that omission and addition are the most common errors. Also, it was found that the occurrence of errors in reading assignments is less common in children with high achievement, presenting better precision, and therefore a greater generalization of phonological structure of words. However, a greater number of errors were found in writing tasks with these children due to the larger quantity of written words.
This study examined play memories from adults who grew up in a wide range of international contexts. Surveys and semi-structured interviews asking adults to recollect play memories were completed with 135 adults (100 Females, 35 Males) who grew up in 21 countries. Play memories were analysed to identify adults' favourite types of childhood play, barriers preventing their play, beliefs about the impact of their childhood play across their lifespan, the emotions associated with recollecting their play, and the similarities and variations represented across the adults' play memories. Pretend play, play in nature, and risk-taking were prevalent themes, however, the data reflect how variation in sociocultural and historical contexts strongly influenced children's play experiences. The majority of participants associated play memories with positive feelings and reported lifelong benefits of early play experiences. The literature on sociocultural variations in children's play and neuroscience research on memories as reconstructions informs discussion of the findings.

Previous work examines the relationships between personality traits and intrinsic/extrinsic motivation. We replicate and extend previous work to examine how personality may relate to achievement goals, efficacious beliefs, and mindset about intelligence. Approximately 200 undergraduates responded to the survey with a 150 participants replicating the study two weeks later. When comparing data from the first and second collections, three of the five pathways for personality and achievement goals were replicated: neuroticism, openness, and agreeableness. For personality and efficacy three of the eight pathways remained significant from the first collection to the second. Openness was the only personality factor that significantly predicted participants' mindset about their intelligence. Results suggest certain personality traits may correspond with different motivational self-beliefs, but these results were neither reliable nor consistent.
In education assessment, teachers seem to be always trapped in between punishing or rewarding their students, making some special concessions for those at risk, or being totally controlled by standard methods of learning evaluation. Are there differences between these three? Is there an equilibrium point that balances their benefits and diminish their cons? Can we put the accent in the quality of the assessment goals as to really use it for strengthening our student 's learning ability? In this paper, the authors review three assessment options, justice as it is, equity and how it can be applied within the margins of justice, and the standardization methods modern world is pressuring teachers and institutions towards; and compare those options to the University of Guadalajara (UdeG) model of education, it's exit profiles and competencies set for the baccalaureate education level in both the national education project in Mexico, and the UdeG's, both their curricular maps, and the education principles them both establish for this level of education. Then the authors analyze the most important principles Neurosciences have discovered about human learning so far, to conclude teachers are accomplishing more than instructing a discipline, and actually contribute to their student's cognitive development in terms of their neurogenesis, their synaptic plasticity and the expansion of their human connectome. Thus, the authors contrast those main items against the principles of justice assessment, equity in assessment and standardized assessment, and whether they adequate to the educational model and curriculum design for the baccalaureate. From there, they call teachers to evaluate for comprehension-students own comprehension of themselves, and their comprehension towards others-, through self-assessment, formative assessment, and metacognition, which they consider the qualitative heart of education assessment, whichever style assessment teachers choose to apply.
This paper details the research participation of undergraduate students from the freshman to the senior year. Four courses were designated to prepare students for a nanotechnology research career. New modes of instructions leading to research participation followed in this curriculum have been reported. This covers integration of knowledge, just in time approach, and project portfolio based curriculum. Courses developed in this track emphasize research and applications in health sciences and renewable energy areas. The structure of the track program was presented before with emphasis on the senior level courses of the track. The work in this paper, however, emphasizes research participation in nanotechnology of the junior students within the electrical engineering, computer engineering, and mechanical engineering disciplines. The multidisciplinary components in nanotechnology research topics were attractive to students to work in team. The topics covered in this course included nanotechnology applications in diabetes, cancer research, and neurosciences. Lecture materials were all from up-to-date research papers, and can be altered with the course updates. Students registered for this course were required to emphasize two research topics seven week each, and prepare research posters in a research day where industrial representatives are invited to participate in the discussions with students. Students who completed this course were interested to continue with nanotechnology individual research and get enrolled in upper level courses. The course starts with introducing students to the nanotechnology applications in various fields, including environment, society, consumer electronics, computers, health sciences, optics, electromagnetics, energy, and medical imaging. The course then introduces students to research issues emphasizing health sciences and renewable energy. Students will be required to expand their research to cover in depth one or two research issues that fall within their interests. In the research projects, students work in team, two students/team, and assignment is given to bath to share the contribution of the project. The course was assessed with student satisfaction, and the objectives and the outcomes of the course were met.
In order to review the relationship between learning a second language (L2), cognitive development and motor experience, was raised as an educational alternative in the process of teaching and language learning in preschool education, corporal expression (EC) area that makes the child a free exploration of movement, allowing them to express their communication and relational skills. EC activities in relation to second language program were based on the value that neuroscience gives the experience in the first years of life. This qualitative study was developed from the observation of three categories: emotional/relational, teaching/learning to L2 and transversal aspects of the activity in the school context. The study revealed that the EC is an integral element of the adequate knowledge to the overall perception of the child in the world, besides showing that promotes issues such as body image, posture and concentration.
social networks are currently an important part of communication, personal relationships, businesses, and of course education. This article is product of 4 cross-sectional research projects conducted from 2010 to 2014 in students from UASLP Mexico. It describes the findings related to the use of social networks for both personal communications and academic processes as a teaching aid. It shows the application of research results to the implementation of the concrete-virtual model in supporting classes such as research methods, neuromarketing, industrial psychology, and instrumentation at the UASLP highlands campus. It highlights the way social networks have allowed not only improvements in learning and evaluation, but also in terms of deepening participation and integration of formal knowledge by students in a non-formal virtual setting as an additional educational tool.
Over the last two decades, the study of information transmission in living beings has acquired great relevance, because it regulates and conducts the functioning of all of the organs in the body. In information transmission pathways, the neuron plays an important role in that it receives, transmits, and processes electrical signals from different parts of the human body; these signals are transmitted as electrical impulses called action potentials, and they transmit information from one neuron to another. In this work, and with the aim of developing experiments for teaching biological processes, we implemented an electronic circuit of the neuron cell device and its mathematical model based on piecewise linear functions.
This article summarizes the assessment of the origins of violence by James W. Prescott and presents ideas for a proposal of violence prevention in Mexico. Prescott's neuropsychological and anthropological studies find that the main causes of the exponential increase in violence and violence against women are gender inequality and the lack of sensory physical pleasure throughout life, but particularly during the stage of infancy, due to the failure to establish an affective bond between the mother and the infant. Prescott demonstrates that this bond is necessary for optimal cerebral, emotional, social, and intellectual development, and for the creation of non-violent societies. His anthropological studies provide support of how gender equality promotes more pacific societies with higher levels of social well-being. We also present the finds of neurological studies by Chilton Pearce on practices to promote in family and school environments in favor of optimal development of the brain and of intelligence, as well as to shape pacific individuals.
It has been shown that supplementation with omega-3 improves cognitive performance, especially in infants and toddlers, but it is unknown whether these results are effective in older malnourished children. The aims of this study, therefore, were to investigate the omega-3 supplementation effects in 8- to 12-year-old children and to know which neuropsychological functions improve after three months of intervention in a sample of Mexican children with mild to moderate malnutrition. This study was a randomized, double-blind, treatment and placebo study of 59 children aged 8-12 years who were individually allocated to 2 groups. The duration of the intervention lasted 3 months. Neuropsychological performance was measured at baseline and at 3 months. Results show that more than 50% of children in the treatment group had greater improvement in 11 of the 18 neuropsychological variables studied. Processing speed, visual-motor coordination, perceptual integration, attention and executive function showed improvement in more than 70% of the omega-3 supplemented children. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT01199120. (c) 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The purpose of the present work was to create a model that fosters phonological awareness in first and second grade of elementary school children, which allows them to develop the necessary phonological awareness strategies in order to acquire the Reading and writing skills, which are very important in all people's early education. A total of 16 boys and 4 girls from first and second grade of a public elementary school in Merida, Yucatan, Mexico, were chosen for the investigation. In the initial stage, two tests were applied; the Phonological Awareness Assessment test (ECOFON), which is an oral test applied to children from 7 to 11 years old, and the Children Neuropsychological Assessment test (ENI), designed for children between 5 and 16 years old. In the present study, reading and writing dimensions were applied in order to know the participants' level and to relate it with their phonological awareness level. With this information, a diagnosis of phonological awareness skill trails was done. Experimental and control groups were arranged according to the level of phonological awareness, reading and writing skills which both tests revealed. The experimental group was treated with a foster model of phonological awareness, which consisted of an intervention program arranged in 14 sessions: two of lexical awareness, six of syllable awareness, and six of phonemic awareness. After that, another round of the ECOFON and ENI tests was applied, and the levels of phonological, reading and writing awareness were analyzed and compared in both groups. The hypothesis test was performed using a Wilcoxon test. The results show the effectiveness of the phonologic awareness intervention program and confirm the relation of phonological awareness as a predictor of Reading and writing skills. Finally, the discussion, recommendations and suggestions regarding the investigation were provided.
The main objective of this work was to experimentally determine whether there is an increase in certain fundamental cognitive processes - attention, motivation and memory-of undergraduate college students when the class sessions are conducted in an environment rich in both use of information technologies (ITs) and teaching practices based on neuroscience principles. The research had a mixed methodology design, specifically convergent and parallel. Furthermore, the experiment itself was developed with two different groups of the same course, but with the same professor. In the experimental group the practices were implemented and in the control group a traditional academic environment was structured. As data collection tools, non-participant observation, two standardized tests (d2-test and a memory sub-test) and a weekly survey to measure levels of motivation were used. The results showed that the three dependent variables analyzed (fundamental cognitive processes studied), reflected a positive impact in the experimental group. The academic performance of the students within this particular group increased as well. These results not only demonstrate the importance of exploring in greater depth the implementation of information technology and principles of neuroscience in new educational environments, but also provide a practical baseline for teaching strategies.
Background: Children born very low birth weight (VLBW) are at increased risk for regulatory difficulties. However, identifying toddlers at risk has been impeded by a lack of screening measures appropriate for this population. Methods: We studied the nature of dysregulation in toddlers born VLBW (N = 32) using the Infant-Toddler Social and Emotional Assessment (ITSEA) Dysregulation Domain, a multiscale (including negative emotionality, sleep, eating, and sensory sensitivity) screening assessment of regulatory abilities. Results: As evidence of construct validity for this population, ITSEA scores for toddlers born VLBW showed greater overall dysregulation, as well as sensory sensitivity, compared with an ITSEA manual-based premature/LBW sample. This was seen both by higher overall Dysregulation Domain scores and higher percentages of toddlers exceeding the clinical cutoff levels. Furthermore, compared with age-and gender-matched full-term toddlers, the VLBW toddlers displayed gender-specific dysregulation profiles. Conclusions: The greater overall dysregulation in VLBW toddlers compared with premature/LBW toddlers suggests that early screening for such difficulties among VLBW toddlers is warranted, and this study provides preliminary evidence that the ITSEA Dysregulation Domain may be an appropriate screening measure.
The presentation of our monographic dossier indicates an interest in modern psychology towards applied research studies from a historical-cultural perspective. Although it is possible to find theoretical studies in the literature, publications that include concrete data obtained from this psychological conception are scarce. The goal of our dossier is to present theoretical and practical evidence related to aspects of psychological development and assessment of children from this perspective. In the studies included in the dossier, qualitative features of psychological development during preschool and early school age are described, and children's difficulties and development possibilities are analyzed with some specific proposals for educational practice. All the studies include empirical data obtained through the administration of either psychological assessment tools or developmental programmes. Such aspects of development as: the relationship between historical-cultural psychology and neuropsychology, internal and egocentric language, symbolic function, play activity as a form of preschool development, and acquisition of initial mathematic abilities are taken into account. The historical-cultural paradigm of human development together with activity theory represents a powerful means that can help improve specific methodologies for education and development in childhood.
Schizophrenia and high functioning autism-spectrum disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopmental conditions that mainly impair social competence, while general intelligence (IQ) is spared. Both disorders have a strong ancillary role in theoretical research on social cognition. Recently the debate has started to be inflected by embodied and phenomenological approaches, which claim that the standard portrayal of all social understanding as so-called 'mindreading', i.e. the attribution of mental states to others in the service of explaining and predicting their behavior, is misguided. Instead it is emphasized that we normally perceive others directly as conscious and goal-directed persons, without requiring any theorizing and/or simulation. This paper evaluates some of the implications of abnormal experiences reported by people with schizophrenia and ASD for the current debate in cognitive science. For these people the practice of explicit mindreading seems to be a compensatory strategy that ultimately fails to compensate for - and may even exacerbate - their impairment of intuitive and interactive social understanding. Phenomenological psychopathology thereby supports the emerging view that 'mindreading' is not the principal form of normal social understanding. (C) 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Attention to diversity is a point of fairness that favors the personalization of teaching and learning through a variety of strategies that involve cognitive theories. This theories determining the differences between students learning and thinking styles. This paper presents an ontological model to represent the student's learning profile from two cognitive theories, the first NLP theory that caters perception and another associated with a theory of Neuroscience that determines the student thinking style. NLP theory with the objective of address the diversity of perception, to apply the model visual-auditory- kinesthetic (VAK) proposed by Rita Dunn and Kenneth Dunn, considers that the route of information entry (eye, ear, body). The representation system: visual, auditory, kinesthetic is essential in the learner's preferences or teaches [1]. Furthermore, using the cognitive theory of whole brain by Herrmann Ned to meet the thinking style, the model suggests that the brain is divided into four quadrants that determine different styles of information processing in individuals [2]. A quadrant (Theoretical) is analytical, logical, rational, inclined to ascertain the reasons for what happens, the B quadrant (Process) is organized, sequential, conservative and orderly, C quadrant (Relational) is interpersonal, emotional, intuitive, prefers teamwork, and finally the D quadrant (Creative) is inclusive, visionary, risk-taker, loves to create and invent, it has a facility for problem solving to find different solutions. Thus the student's learning profile will be determined by the combination of the three learning styles: visual, auditory and kinesthetic; and the four thinking styles: theory, process, creative and relational. One artificial intelligence model that organizes knowledge in standard form with the objective that categorizes the information for it can be processed by computers are the ontologies. The methodology used for the design of ontologies considered based Noy & McGuiness (2001) [3] methodology, Methontology methodology and OntoDesign Graphics for graphing. Simple Methodology Ontology Graphics Design (SMODG) is used for educational purposes, offers people who first designed a simple ontology guide them to achieve your goal. The proposed methodology SMODG integrates the simplicity and detail offered by Noy & McGuiness methodology to understand the domain of knowledge and make a good design, while integrating a graphic formal language used to display the ontology design by OntoDesign Graphics, and finally incorporates validation and documentation steps as Methontology required. In this paper we designed and implemented an ontological model consisting of two ontologies: the cognitive styles model and student learning profile model. The ontology of cognitive styles model was designed for give freedom to the user to select educational psychology or neuroscience theories to he/she want to use. For testing purposes of this study we used the whole brain theory and VAK theory. The ontology of the student's learning profile model serves as a classifier, providing to the teachers additional information about the student to personalize the instruction. The ontological model to represent the Learner Profile (OMSLP) allows to classify individuals according to their learning profile to customize their education and achieve better academic performance.

While it is known that the process of becoming literate begins in early childhood and usually involves several years of schooling, research related to cognitive characteristics has been done mostly on illiterate adults, and information concerning illiterate children is therefore limited. The aim of the present study, involving 21 illiterate and 22 literate Mexican children aged 6 to 13, was to investigate the effects of literacy on neuropsychological characteristics during childhood. The children's performance on 16 cognitive domains of the Evaluacion Neuropsicologica Infantil (ENI, Child Neuropsychological Assessment) was examined in three mixed within- and between-groups profile analyses. The results suggest that the effect of literacy observed in adults is already evident in children in almost every task analysed. Moreover, the fact that an age effect was detected for the calculation abilities suggests that maths learning is school- and environment-dependent.
An increasing problem at school realms is the one of kids who displays symptoms of attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Due to their condition, they mature slower than their classmates in aspects such as fine and gross motor faculty, oral and writing abilities and concentration, among others. This problem is treated by the neurologists through the administration of dangerous drugs to kids. The workshop Whole health values aimed at the parents of kids diagnosed with attention deficit and hyperactivity was designed to show them a different way of facing the problem. The methodology applied was research-participative action. The participants were: a psychologist, the kid's parents and teachers and a diet expert trained in Feingold diet who manages food intolerance in children. The parents had to keep a daily record of the events and results from the applied strategy. The results are evidence that Feingold diet combined with the use of ingredients known as therapeutic by traditional Mexican cuisine, are a viable and effective alternative to the administration of dangerous drugs to kids.
Stress control is a decisive factor in sports competence. The goal of this study is the development of an alternative methodology for stress measurement using various computer science techniques in conjunction with non-conventional theories from medicine and sociology.
The aims of this article are to review the multiple relations between creativity and personality, exploring the measurement instruments that have been used to identify them. Specific personality characteristics and traits found in highly creative individuals and the interaction of these traits with the creative process are described. In addition, results of research projects conducted at the National Institute of Psychiatry Ramon de la Fuente in Mexico City are presented. These projects evaluated personality traits and behaviors present in productive and successful highly creative individuals. The association of these traits and behaviors with differential brain activation and molecular genetic variations in neurotransmitters systems were also explored, which suggested some neurobiological foundations for the creative personality. Finally, it is shown how certain developmental events are critical for personality formation and creativity maturation, pointing out the need for specific strategies in designing and producing programs and policies to provide quality education for all children.
The term App is a short way to name the application in singular and plural. The following paper based upon a teachers log, summarizes some of the most important experiences a group of teachers faced previous, during and while using iPad applications to stimulate kids, from 45 days to 4 years old. Based on a timeline we introduce both the enthusiastic experience and the scientific perspective, only with the objectivity and the theoretical frame to support the paper, but in a storytelling way, to take the readers with us in a journey that helps them visualize the experience, closer to the feelings but not so far from the objectivity of the science. From Apps designed to provide infants with essential stimulation during early stages of development to Apps that help teachers to facilitate the reading and writing process at the time they enjoy and explore the technology in a friendly and natural way. As a result of our research project, we found that some apps are based on decades of research and beautifully designed, they were planned to provide as much stimulation as possible, some of them use bold, high-contrast symbols, shapes, patterns, and captivating sounds, proven to be preferred by infants. We decided to use apps as teaching aids and we chose those with a higher level of stimulation in the areas of cognitive and motor development, but with impressive potential to provide with significant visual tracking, scanning, and object permanence, the aim was considered in two main ways, using English as a communication channel and technology that speeds myelination of brain cells. On the other hand, the term 'early intervention' designates educational and neuro-protection strategies aimed at enhancing brain development. Using technology as one of these strategies increases both the teaching experience for the teachers in charge of the early stimulation, as well as the learning experience for babies. Early educational strategies seek to take advantage of cerebral plasticity, according to the experts, from the born day to the age of seven, represent the most adequate and important period to generate as much neuro-connections as possible. In our experience we have observed that kids respond naturally and friendly to the chosen apps as teaching aids to present vocabulary, to practice hand writing, to read stories and to have fun at the time they practice math, sciences and other skills. Early stimulation programs were first devised in the United States for vulnerable children in low-income families; positive effects were recorded regarding school failure rates and social problems. In the language learning area, we decided to put in practice a stimulation program in the University of Colima's Baby Day Care Department BDCD (Estancias Infantiles in Spanish). The institution attends the kids of every woman that works for the University. It is organized in rooms that keep the kids in periods of 6 months, the first three years and twelve months for the last year they spend at the BDCD. The class took place two days a week for each room in sessions of 30 minutes a day. The results so far shows positive results, from the day we began to now we had a great amount of significant experiences we would like to share in a full paper, as well as in the presentation.
The instruments applied for neuropsychological assessment can be divided in two groups: standardized tests and qualitative assessment. In historical-cultural neuropsychology, which supports qualitative procedures, attempts have been made to develop and clinically use test for the analysis of learning and development disorders. This paper proposes and instrument for qualitative neuropsychological assessment applicable to Portuguese speaking children. The test may be useful for the assessment of learning and development problems.
As revealed in discussion at the 2009 Presidential Summit on the Future of Psychology Practice, professional psychology training today is involved in a series of choices for its future. This paper outlines some of those major dilemmas and while acknowledging the difficulties inherent in resolving some of these issues, proposes areas of common ground and a series of next steps, which emphasize the importance of research and assessment as identifying marks of the professional psychologist, the requirements for accountability and standards in training, the need to develop behavioral medicine and neuropsychology as the field increases its partnership with health care, the importance of collaboration with school psychologists and international psychologists, the need to emphasize public sector service, and the imperative to develop these goals in a thoughtful way with new technology.
The article approaches the subject from interactive communication between the approach of performance, making explicit the meaning fluctuating term applied mainly to show that combines elements of art, like music, theater, dance or photography and video demonstrations, whose features differentiators are time, space, context and the relationship between subjects, from corporations to their narrative, part of the communication. We analyze how a relevant elements involved in building a message involving contextual aspects (space-time), individual and social elements arising and body language in a constant flow of meanings. The analysis is complemented by the representation of the ritual, while dragging an inherited regulatory structure is prone to constant changes caused by situational causes that mean re. The intention is to show how the performance, which is usually inserted the orality is an endless act, while its meaning lies not only in word but in the environment, circumstance, in the interplay of individuals, in short, throughout the act of interpretation and evaluation of the action.

Main features of the IGERT program on Integrating Nanotechnology with Cell Biology and Neuroscience (INCBN) at the University of New Mexico (UNM) are described. The INCBN IGERT program at UNM is among over 100 IGERT programs currently supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF). All Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) programs seek to train scientists and engineers to address the global questions of the future. Through the use of innovative curricula and internships, and by focusing on problem-centered training, these programs give their graduates the edge needed to become leaders in their chosen fields. The overarching vision of a new model of education implemented by the INCBN IGERT program is to develop a new cadre of interdisciplinary scholars with excellent research skills, prepared for 21 century challenges brought by the nanotechnology revolution. The program fosters collaborations between science and engineering faculty and School of Medicine (SOM). It creates a collaborative network linking engineering, medicine, and science in order to create the critical mass necessary for multidisciplinary education of students who will apply advanced scientific concepts to biological problems. The program currently assembles over 30 faculty from 9 different departments, spanning 5 different colleges: School of Engineering, College of Arts and Sciences, SOM, College of Pharmacy, and College of Education. The predominant focus of the INCBN IGERT program is on development of novel research tools enabled by nanotechnology and their application to solve important questions in cell biology and neuroscience. New information about molecular and cellular processes revealed by nanoprobes and nanosensors is expected to result in a string of scientific discoveries that will dramatically improve our understanding of basic mechanisms in biology. In the long range, this will significantly improve the depth of our understanding of the cell and molecular processes critical to learning, memory, and behavior, and of those processes that underlie pathological changes in disease.
In 2002, the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM) established the regulations to create Mixed Units to offer services to public and private sectors, linking research projects with the industry, seeking the development of new research lines and specialised personnel in those areas, and spreading the knowledge and experiences gained from the operation of those units. In February 2004, the Facultad de Medicina, on the basis of these regulations, established an Administrative Technical Council to discuss and analyse the academic and operative policies of current and future Mixed Units. There were initially eight Mixed Units under a highly specialised service provision scheme addressed to specific markets. Since then, the units have evolved to develop technology and, in the near future, the integration of franchises that will bring a new profile in the relationship with the private sector. The Mixed Units profile allows offering highly specialised services aimed at high-demand market niches which under this scheme are easily and clearly addressed; in financial terms, this also allows the use of resources to improve their infrastructure and keep them updated. The units must meet the goals of providing services, generating research and developing teaching. According to the continuing evaluation programs, only four Units remain up to now. Here we present three of them, which are pioneers in Mexico due to their technology and fields of specialty. 1. The PET/CT-Cyclotron Unit of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM) is a state-of-the-art molecular imaging facility. It was the first Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Centre in Mexico and nowadays it continues at the forefront in PET technology in our country. The facilities are located on the University's Campus at the Facultad de Medicina, and include 4 laboratories: an accelerator laboratory for radionuclide production, a fully equipped laboratory for radiopharmaceutical production, a preclinical imaging laboratory for small animals and a PET/CT imaging facility for clinical studies. The PET/CT Unit produces [F-18] Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and [N-13] ammonia on a routine basis for internal and external use. More than 80% of the FDG-PET studies in Mexico City and nearby areas are performed using FDG produced in our Centre. In addition to this, we are currently in the process of implementing the production of new radiopharmaceuticals for PET-based molecular imaging in Oncology, Cardiology and Neurology. Thus, UNAM's PET/CT-Cyclotron Unit will stay at the forefront of innovation in the field of PET imaging in Mexico. 2. The Sleep Disorders Clinic is a medical unit specialised in the care of people with sleep disorders. It is integrated by specialists in different areas and polysomnography technicians, and focuses on an unattended market niche since around 100 different sleep disorders are currently known. 3. The Clinical Electrophysiology Unit is an international Centre designed for training and research on the diagnosis and treatment of disorders of the electrical activity of the heart (mainly pacemakers). It has a strong social component because the pacemakers are freely provided by a company in exchange for training. The facilities of the latter two units are located in a public general hospital. During the last three years, as a result of new marketing strategies, these units have had increasing incomes as follows: 2007 - (sic) 1' 454,880.00, 2008 - (sic) 1'789,410.00, 2009 - (sic) 2'232,830.00

Although many studies have compared the brains of normal controls and individuals with autism, especially older, higher-functioning individuals with autism, little is known of the neural correlates of the vast clinical heterogeneity characteristic of the disorder. In this study, we used voxel-based morphometry (VBM) to examine gray matter correlates of variation in communication skill and symptom severity within a heterogeneous group of 33 children with autism ranging in age from 3.4 to 11.4 years. Greater gray matter (GM) volume was associated with better communication skills in numerous frontal regions, especially in the left middle frontal gyrus. Further, greater GM volume in the right inferior frontal gyrus was associated with reduced severity of symptoms of autism. However, increased total GM volume was correlated with more severe symptoms of autism at a trend level, consistent with other studies, suggesting that while increased total GM volume is generally predictive of greater autistic severity, specific local increases in GM volume result in a reduction in symptoms. Our results suggest that communication and symptom severity have distinct neuroanatomic correlates and draw attention to the importance of studying the neuroanatomy of clinical heterogeneity within the autistic population. (C) 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Currently, child neuropsychology contributes developing useful methods for solving development problems. This article presents the applying results of role playing method in a Colombian population in the last school levels (48 children between 5 and 6 years old of a regular private educational institution), in the reflective thought education. The experimental group was applied the thematic roles play method and, according to Vygotsky and Elkonin, it ensures the acquisition of psychological neoformations of the preschool age. The pre-test / post-test analysis helped to show important changes in school activities of the experimental group children after the intervention.
Reading disorder (RD) and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are two of the most common neuropsycho logical problems of childhood. Recent studies indicate that many children have both RD and ADHD and it has been proposed that both conditions can be causally related. The objective of this study was the event-related brain potentials (ERP) recording of ADHD and RD children (8-12 years old) during continuous performance task (CPT), in order to distinguish whether children with ADHD only and RD only demonstrate common or specific deficits in attention and/or inhibition processes measured both behaviorally and electrophysiologically. CPT included five conditions: Go, No Go, Warning, False Go and Frequent stimuli. Behavioral data showed that there were no between-groups differences in hits nor omission or commission errors, but in reaction times to hits control subjects showed significantly shorter times than the other two groups. The electrophysiological results showed that P300 amplitude was larger for Go than for No Go condition in Control and RD groups, but not in the ADHD group. For No Go condition, control group showed higher P300 amplitudes as compared to RD and ADHD. However, the electrophysiological responses of these later groups were different, since ADHD showed larger amplitudes than RD to No Go and False Go stimuli, while RD displayed greater P300 amplitudes as compared to ADHD in Go and Warning stimuli. It is concluded that ADHD children present deficiencies in both the allocation of attentional resources and in the inhibitory processes, while in RD children the main problem is the scarce amount of attentional resources devoted to information processing.
The goal of this article is to summarize current brain research on intelligence and creativity that may be relevant to education in the near future. Five issues are addressed: (a) Why is there a neuroscience interest in intelligence? (b) Can intelligence be located in the brain? (c) Why are some brains smarter than others? (d) What do we know about creativity and the brain? and (e) Can information about an individual's brain structure and function be useful to benefit his or her education? As we enter the 21st century, old controversies about measurement of intelligence are less relevant. Integrating neuroscience findings into education practices is a daunting challenge that will require educators to reexamine old ideas and acquire fundamental backgrounds in new areas.
This article describes a computerized case-based CD-ROM (CD) on international animal health that was developed to give veterinary students an opportunity to virtually work alongside veterinarians and other veterinary students as they try to solve challenging disease problems relating to tuberculosis in South African wildlife, bovine abortion in Mexico, and neurologic disease in horses in Rapa Nui, Chile. Each of the three case modules presents, in a highly interactive format, a problem or mystery that must be solved by the learner. As well as acquiring information via video clips and text about the specific health problem, learners obtain information about the different countries, animal-management practices, diagnostic methods, related disease-control issues, economic factors, and the opinions of local experts. After assimilating this information, the learner must define the problem and formulate an action plan or make a recommendation or diagnosis. The computerized program invokes three principles of adult education: active learning, learner-centered education, and experiential learning. A medium that invokes these principles is a potentially efficient learning tool and template for developing other case-based problem-solving computerized programs. The program is accessible on the World Wide Web at <http://www.calf.vetmed.ucdavis.edu/html/International_web/international_menu.html>. A broadband Internet connection is recommended, since the modules make extensive use of embedded video and audio clips. Information on how to obtain the CD is also provided.
Battery, Luria-DNA is a neuropsychological battery. which has been designed by doctors Manga y Ramos (1999). basing in the Christensen's material. who was a disciple of Luria. With this battery you are able to obtain a comprehensive neuropsychology profile of one person. battery can assessment five domains (viso-space, oral language, memory. intellectual and attention control). In this paper we have to locus the attention, in Study of factory structure. after this instrument has been using to 115 university Students. The outcomes show us and confirm the factorial structure have been obtained while this instrument has been standarized by its authors.
In this paper we analzing the inter and intra individual differences of a group university students in function of educate level, genus and progress level, which has been related with the intellectual capacity and some dimensional personality (extroversion, neurotics and psychoticism). In this study has participated 115 university students, two instruments has been applied, WAIS-III (Wechsler, 1999) and the EPQ-R short form (Eysenck and Eysenck, 1991a), theses dates has been analizing through variance analysis. We found differential statistical significant in some variables, which will have an important application in educative context, to instigate an education which respect the diversity and individual human principles.
We have developed a laboratory exercise that demonstrates arterial baroreflex control of heart rate (HR) in the conscious unrestrained rat, incorporating graduate level physiological topics as well as a hands-on exposure to conscious animal research. This demonstration utilizes rats chronically instrumented to measure cardiac output (CO), HR, and arterial blood pressure in response to agents that raise or lower blood pressure. The HR response to progressive increases or decreases in blood pressure is recorded, and a baroreflex curve is generated by plotting mean arterial blood pressure (MABP) vs. HR. Observation of altered CO allows for discussion of the relationship between MAP, CO, HR, stroke volume, and total peripheral resistance. Administration of arginine vasopressin demonstrates the ability of this hormone to alter the sensitivity of the baroreflex. Throughout the demonstration, students answer questions from a handout about general cardiovascular physiology, specific pathways of agonists, and the baroreflex system, encouraging group and individual critical analysis of the results. Interpretation of the data reemphasizes lecture material and allows students to observe the baroreflex response in a physiological setting.
Although this is a review of Judy Kalman's Writing on the Plaza: Mediated Literacy Practices Among Scribes and Clients in Mexico City, I begin byway of a detour through the world of contemporary film. Not long before reading Writing on the Plaza, I had seen David Lynchs film The Straight Story (Sweeney & Lynch, 1999) As I read Writing on the Plaza, my mind kept racing back and forth between the book and the film. The Straight Story is a documentary written in an ethnographic style reminiscent of pioneering educational ethnographies such as Shirley Price Heaths Ways With Words. Based on a real event in the life of a real person, the film chronicles Alvin Straight's 6-week trek across parts of Iowa and Wisconsin on a 1966 John Deere lawnmower to visit his estranged brother, Lyle, who has recently suffered a stroke. Despite his ill health and the dangers of the road, Alvin is determined to sit with Lyle under the stars, as they did when they were young boys, hoping to heal the hurt between them. Along the way, Alvin forges elusive yet substantive connections with an odd assortment of people - a runaway girl, a retired John Deere salesman, a neurotic career woman who repeatedly collides with deer on her commute, a haunted World War II veteran, and a lonely country priest. During extraordinary, extraordinarily brief, and wonderfully ambiguous encounters that break long silences in the film, Alvin shares fragments of his life history with these people, and they share fragments of their life histories with him. Verisimilitude, contingency, and understatement are the key tropes of these interactions and of the film itself. Verisimilitude, contingency, and understatement are also the key tropes of Writing on the Plaza. The book offers glib but rich descriptions of the interactions that occur between scribes and their clients on La Plaza de Santo Domingo in Mexico City. Scribes are highly literate individuals who earn their living by typing specialized documents such as letters, tax forms, contractual agreements, employment applications, and the like for their less literate clients. Following Kalman and others, I use the term literate with considerable caution here. As Kalman's research demonstrates, when literacy is viewed not as set of skills but as a set of social practices, deciding who is literate and who is not becomes a very complicated problem. Like assigning literate status to social actors and like the interactions that occur between Alvin Straight and everyone he encounters on the road, the interactions that occur between scribes and their clients on La Plaza de Santo Domingo are far from straightforward. They involve two individuals who bring together their knowledge of the social world, their knowledge of the functions of texts and documents, and their reading strategies to be used in the creation of the document in order to achieve a desired effect (p. x). Yet these interactions are also permeated by other characteristics of social relationships such as class, gender, and educational differences (p. 139) that make every instance of composing a situated, intertextually complex, contingent, and dialogic social activity. The organization of Writing on the Plaza is straightforward. Chapter 1 includes a review of research on the social functions of literacy, an introduction to the study that led to the book, and a set of chapter outlines. Though necessarily selective, Kalmans review of research on the social functions of literacy is particularly insightful. Chapter 2 presents a history of scribal activity on La Plaza de Santo Domingo from the 16th century to the present, as well as portraits of the Kalman's scribe and client participants. Her history of scribing on the plaza is especially artful, integrating primary source documents (e.g., indigenous religious codices, colonial interactions that occur on La Plaza de Santo Domingo and that they will enjoy the time they spend there('' also think that readers will find Kalman's histories fresh and compelling. Readers will also appreciate how the book foregrounds the self-organizing and contingent character of even the simplest literacy practices, and they will look forward to reading Kalman's future work.
Seventy-eight psychiatrists attending an American Psychiatric Association (APA) district branch continuing education meeting were surveyed about their awareness and acceptance of the APA's practice guideline for bipolar disorder. Assessments were conducted immediately before and again immediately following an educational intervention, which consisted of a 3-hour slide-show and lecture presentation on these guidelines. Before the presentation, one out of six of these psychiatrists did not know that practice guidelines even existed, and about one-half did not have (or did not know that they had) a copy, and they did not know that guidelines were published in the American Journal of Psychiatry. Almost half had not read any of the bipolar guideline, whereas 34% had read some or thoroughly. Responses before and following the intervention showed that a large majority of the psychiatrists felt that this specific guideline generally validated the manner in which they treated patients with bipolar disorders, and almost half felt that knowledge obtained from the guideline had changed, or would change, their treatment of bipolar disorders in the fixture. High levels of acceptability for the guideline were reported both by those who had previously read the guideline and those who first became familiar with it during the presentation. Presentations at APA district branches may aid in dissemination of practice guidelines, but additional interventions and dissemination techniques are required as well. Since questions based on the APA's practice guidelines will be increasingly influential in American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology recertification examinations, more comprehensive dissemination methods are needed to assure that practitioners are well acquainted with these guidelines.
Cerebrovascular disease is the third leading cause of mortality in this country and is a leading cause of disability. To develop successful prevention programs to decrease the incidence of stroke, individuals should adopt cerebrovascular-healthy behaviors during youth, rather than in middle or old age, when risks for stroke are highest. The authors assessed the knowledge of stroke risk factors in university students presenting to a student health neurology clinic over a 14-month period. Half of the 98 students surveyed thought stress, a very weak risk factor, was a causative factor in the development of stroke. Only one third named hypertension or smoking as a risk factor. No significant gender, ethnic, or age differences were observed in student identification of stroke risk factors. These data indicate that university students have an incomplete understanding of the characteristics that are risk factors for stroke. This knowledge deficit is likely to have a negative influence on students' health behaviors.
An overview of interdisciplinary efforts from a variety of research fields in the area of literacy is provided. Particular attention is given to research in the etiology of developmental reading disorder (dyslexia). Medical, psycholinguistic, cognitive, and neuropsychological models of differential reading behavior of normal and dyslexic individuals have united in recent years. Theories of laterality in human cerebral hemisphere development and visual, phonological, and motor processing were once researched almost in isolation of one another. Recent connections made among these and other seemingly disparate theories have resulted in testable and integrative hypotheses, which are researched with behavioral and neurophysiological methods. This new research appears to be bringing us closer to an understanding of the most proximal neurological functions attached to cognitive linguistic processing, which explain the consistently observed behaviors common to developmental reading disorders.
Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) has shown a neurotrophic effect in the neurons of several CNS areas. In vivo, it contributes to restore neurochemical and morphological deficits in different rodent models of brain damage, including rats with brain damage induced by hypoxia/ischemia when FGF was intramuscularly (i.m.) administered. Toxicological and immunological studies performed in rats, mice and volunteers showed no evidence of side-effects. Bovine FGF was i.m. administered in children with mental retardation caused by perinatal hypoxia, aged 1-15 years, at dosages of 0.4 or 0.28 mug kg-1, once or twice a month, over 7-12 months. Group A [n = 12; 6 treated (T), 6 controls (Ct)], group B (n = 16; 8 T, 8 Ct) and group C (n = 67; 45 T, 22 Ct) were evaluated with the P. A. R. scale, the WISC-RM and the Gesell scale, respectively. Development increased significantly in treated children from groups A (P<0.02) and C (P<0.001), and IQ rose by more than 10 points (P<0.001) in group B patients.
